It is the late 1750s, and
the French and Indian War grips the wild forest frontier of western
New York. The French army is attacking Fort William Henry, a British
outpost commanded by Colonel Munro. Munro’s daughters Alice and
Cora set out from Fort Edward to visit their father, escorted through
the dangerous forest by Major Duncan Heyward and guided by an Indian named
Magua. Soon they are joined by David Gamut, a singing master and
religious follower of Calvinism. Traveling cautiously, the group
encounters the white scout Natty Bumppo, who goes by the name Hawkeye,
and his two Indian companions, Chingachgook and Uncas, Chingachgook’s
son, the only surviving members of the once great Mohican tribe.
Hawkeye says that Magua, a Huron, has betrayed the group by leading
them in the wrong direction. The Mohicans attempt to capture the
traitorous Huron, but he escapes. Hawkeye and the Mohicans lead the group to safety in
a cave near a waterfall, but Huron allies of Magua attack early
the next morning. Hawkeye and the Mohicans escape down the river,
but Hurons capture Alice, Cora, Heyward, and Gamut. Magua celebrates
the kidnapping. When Heyward tries to convert Magua to the English
side, the Huron reveals that he seeks revenge on Munro for past
humiliation and proposes to free Alice if Cora will marry him. Cora
has romantic feelings for Uncas, however, and angrily refuses Magua.
Suddenly Hawkeye and the Mohicans burst onto the scene, rescuing
the captives and killing every Huron but Magua, who escapes. After
a harrowing journey impeded by Indian attacks, the group reaches
Fort William Henry, the English stronghold. They sneak through the
French army besieging the fort, and, once inside, Cora and Alice
reunite with their father. A few days later, the English forces call for a truce.
Munro learns that he will receive no reinforcements for the fort
and will have to surrender. He reveals to Heyward that Cora’s mother
was part “Negro,” which explains her dark complexion and raven hair. Munro
accuses Heyward of racism because he prefers to marry blonde Alice
over dark Cora, but Heyward denies the charge. During the withdrawal
of the English troops from Fort William Henry, the Indian allies
of the French indulge their bloodlust and prey upon the vulnerable
retreating soldiers. In the chaos of slaughter, Magua manages to
recapture Cora, Alice, and Gamut and to escape with them into the
forest. Three days later, Heyward, Hawkeye, Munro, and the Mohicans discover
Magua’s trail and begin to pursue the villain. Gamut reappears and
explains that Magua has separated his captives, confining Alice
to a Huron camp and sending Cora to a Delaware camp. Using deception
and a variety of disguises, the group manages to rescue Alice from
the Hurons, at which point Heyward confesses his romantic interest
in her. At the Delaware village, Magua convinces the tribe that
Hawkeye and his companions are their racist enemies. Uncas reveals
his exalted heritage to the Delaware sage Tamenund and then demands
the release of all his friends but Cora, who he admits belongs to
Magua. Magua departs with Cora. A chase and a battle ensue. Magua
and his Hurons suffer painful defeat, but a rogue Huron kills Cora.
Uncas begins to attack the Huron who killed Cora, but Magua stabs
Uncas in the back. Magua tries to leap across a great divide, but
he falls short and must cling to a shrub to avoid tumbling off and
dying. Hawkeye shoots him, and Magua at last plummets to his death. Cora and Uncas receive proper burials the next morning
amid ritual chants performed by the Delawares. Chingachgook mourns the
loss of his son, while Tamenund sorrowfully declares that he has lived
to see the last warrior of the noble race of the Mohicans.