At the Tabard Inn, a tavern in Southwark, near London,
the narrator joins a company of twenty-nine pilgrims. The pilgrims,
like the narrator, are traveling to the shrine of the martyr Saint
Thomas Becket in Canterbury. The narrator gives a descriptive account
of twenty-seven of these pilgrims, including a Knight, Squire, Yeoman, Prioress,
Monk, Friar, Merchant, Clerk, Man of Law, Franklin, Haberdasher,
Carpenter, Weaver, Dyer, Tapestry-Weaver, Cook, Shipman, Physician,
Wife, Parson, Plowman, Miller, Manciple, Reeve, Summoner, Pardoner,
and Host. (He does not describe the Second Nun or the Nun’s Priest,
although both characters appear later in the book.) The Host, whose
name, we find out in the Prologue to the Cook’s Tale, is Harry Bailey,
suggests that the group ride together and entertain one
another with stories. He decides that each pilgrim will tell two
stories on the way to Canterbury and two on the way back. Whomever
he judges to be the best storyteller will receive a meal at Bailey’s
tavern, courtesy of the other pilgrims. The pilgrims draw lots and
determine that the Knight will tell the first tale. Theseus, duke of Athens, imprisons Arcite and Palamon,
two knights from Thebes (another city in ancient Greece). From their prison,
the knights see and fall in love with Theseus’s sister-in-law, Emelye.
Through the intervention of a friend, Arcite is freed, but he is
banished from Athens. He returns in disguise and becomes a page in
Emelye’s chamber. Palamon escapes from prison, and the two meet
and fight over Emelye. Theseus apprehends them and arranges a tournament
between the two knights and their allies, with Emelye as the prize.
Arcite wins, but he is accidentally thrown from his horse and dies.
Palamon then marries Emelye. The Host asks the Monk to tell the next tale, but the
drunken Miller interrupts and insists that his tale should be the
next. He tells the story of an impoverished student named Nicholas,
who persuades his landlord’s sexy young wife, Alisoun, to spend
the night with him. He convinces his landlord, a carpenter named
John, that the second flood is coming, and tricks him into spending
the night in a tub hanging from the ceiling of his barn. Absolon,
a young parish clerk who is also in love with Alisoun, appears outside
the window of the room where Nicholas and Alisoun lie together.
When Absolon begs Alisoun for a kiss, she sticks her rear end out
the window in the dark and lets him kiss it. Absolon runs and gets
a red-hot poker, returns to the window, and asks for another kiss;
when Nicholas sticks his bottom out the window and farts, Absolon
brands him on the buttocks. Nicholas’s cries for water make the
carpenter think that the flood has come, so the carpenter cuts the
rope connecting his tub to the ceiling, falls down, and breaks his
arm. Because he also does carpentry, the Reeve takes offense
at the Miller’s tale of a stupid carpenter, and counters with his
own tale of a dishonest miller. The Reeve tells the story of two
students, John and Alayn, who go to the mill to watch the miller
grind their corn, so that he won’t have a chance to steal any. But
the miller unties their horse, and while they chase it, he steals
some of the flour he has just ground for them. By the time the students
catch the horse, it is dark, so they spend the night in the miller’s
house. That night, Alayn seduces the miller’s daughter, and John
seduces his wife. When the miller wakes up and finds out what has
happened, he tries to beat the students. His wife, thinking that
her husband is actually one of the students, hits the miller over
the head with a staff. The students take back their stolen goods
and leave. The Cook particularly enjoys the Reeve’s Tale, and offers
to tell another funny tale. The tale concerns an apprentice named
Perkyn who drinks and dances so much that he is called “Perkyn Reveler.” Finally,
Perkyn’s master decides that he would rather his apprentice leave
to revel than stay home and corrupt the other servants. Perkyn arranges
to stay with a friend who loves drinking and gambling, and who has
a wife who is a prostitute. The tale breaks off, unfinished, after
fifty-eight lines. The Host reminds his fellow pilgrims to waste no time,
because lost time cannot be regained. He asks the Man of Law to
tell the next tale. The Man of Law agrees, apologizing that he cannot
tell any suitable tale that Chaucer has not already told—Chaucer
may be unskilled as a poet, says the Man of Law, but he has told
more stories of lovers than Ovid, and he doesn’t print tales of
incest as John Gower does (Gower was a contemporary of Chaucer).
In the Prologue to his tale, the Man of Law laments the miseries
of poverty. He then remarks how fortunate merchants are, and says
that his tale is one told to him by a merchant. In the tale, the Muslim sultan of Syria converts his entire
sultanate (including himself) to Christianity in order to persuade
the emperor of Rome to give him his daughter, Custance, in marriage. The
sultan’s mother and her attendants remain secretly faithful to Islam.
The mother tells her son she wishes to hold a banquet for him and
all the Christians. At the banquet, she massacres her son and all the
Christians except for Custance, whom she sets adrift in a rudderless
ship. After years of floating, Custance runs ashore in Northumberland,
where a constable and his wife, Hermengyld, offer her shelter. She
converts them to Christianity. One night, Satan makes a young knight sneak into Hermengyld’s chamber
and murder Hermengyld. He places the bloody knife next to Custance,
who sleeps in the same chamber. When the constable returns home,
accompanied by Alla, the king of Northumberland, he finds his slain
wife. He tells Alla the story of how Custance was found, and Alla
begins to pity the girl. He decides to look more deeply into the
murder. Just as the knight who murdered Hermengyld is swearing that
Custance is the true murderer, he is struck down and his eyes burst
out of his face, proving his guilt to Alla and the crowd. The knight
is executed, Alla and many others convert to Christianity, and Custance
and Alla marry. While Alla is away in Scotland, Custance gives birth to
a boy named Mauricius. Alla’s mother, Donegild, intercepts a letter
from Custance to Alla and substitutes a counterfeit one that claims
that the child is disfigured and bewitched. She then intercepts
Alla’s reply, which claims that the child should be kept and loved
no matter how malformed. Donegild substitutes a letter saying that Custance
and her son are banished and should be sent away on the same ship
on which Custance arrived. Alla returns home, finds out what has
happened, and kills Donegild. After many adventures at sea, including an attempted rape, Custance
ends up back in Rome, where she reunites with Alla, who has made
a pilgrimage there to atone for killing his mother. She also reunites
with her father, the emperor. Alla and Custance return to England,
but Alla dies after a year, so Custance returns, once more, to Rome.
Mauricius becomes the next Roman emperor. Following the Man of Law’s Tale, the Host asks the Parson
to tell the next tale, but the Parson reproaches him for swearing,
and they fall to bickering. The Wife of Bath gives a lengthy account of her feelings
about marriage. Quoting from the Bible, the Wife argues against
those who believe it is wrong to marry more than once, and she explains
how she dominated and controlled each of her five husbands. She
married her fifth husband, Jankyn, for love instead of money. After
the Wife has rambled on for a while, the Friar butts in to complain
that she is taking too long, and the Summoner retorts that friars
are like flies, always meddling. The Friar promises to tell a tale
about a summoner, and the Summoner promises to tell a tale about
a friar. The Host cries for everyone to quiet down and allow the
Wife to commence her tale. In her tale, a young knight of King Arthur’s court rapes
a maiden; to atone for his crime, Arthur’s queen sends him on a
quest to discover what women want most. An ugly old woman promises
the knight that she will tell him the secret if he promises to do
whatever she wants for saving his life. He agrees, and she tells
him women want control of their husbands and their own lives. They
go together to Arthur’s queen, and the old woman’s answer turns
out to be correct. The old woman then tells the knight that he must
marry her. When the knight confesses later that he is repulsed by
her appearance, she gives him a choice: she can either be ugly and
faithful, or beautiful and unfaithful. The knight tells her to make
the choice herself, and she rewards him for giving her control of
the marriage by rendering herself both beautiful and faithful. The Friar speaks approvingly of the Wife of Bath’s Tale,
and offers to lighten things up for the company by telling a funny
story about a lecherous summoner. The Summoner does not object,
but he promises to pay the Friar back in his own tale. The Friar
tells of an archdeacon who carries out the law without mercy, especially
to lechers. The archdeacon has a summoner who has a network of spies
working for him, to let him know who has been lecherous. The summoner
extorts money from those he’s sent to summon, charging them more
money than he should for penance. He tries to serve a summons on
a yeoman who is actually a devil in disguise. After comparing notes
on their treachery and extortion, the devil vanishes, but when the
summoner tries to prosecute an old wealthy widow unfairly, the widow
cries out that the summoner should be taken to hell. The devil follows
the woman’s instructions and drags the summoner off to hell. The Summoner, furious at the Friar’s Tale, asks the company
to let him tell the next tale. First, he tells the company that
there is little difference between friars and fiends, and that when
an angel took a friar down to hell to show him the torments there,
the friar asked why there were no friars in hell; the angel then
pulled up Satan’s tail and 20,000 friars
came out of his ass. In the Summoner’s Tale, a friar begs for money from a
dying man named Thomas and his wife, who have recently lost their
child. The friar shamelessly exploits the couple’s misfortunes to
extract money from them, so Thomas tells the friar that he is sitting
on something that he will bequeath to the friars. The friar reaches
for his bequest, and Thomas lets out an enormous fart. The friar
complains to the lord of the manor, whose squire promises to divide
the fart evenly among all the friars. The Host asks the Clerk to cheer up and tell a merry tale,
and the Clerk agrees to tell a tale by the Italian poet Petrarch.
Griselde is a hardworking peasant who marries into the aristocracy.
Her husband tests her fortitude in several ways, including pretending
to kill her children and divorcing her. He punishes her
one final time by forcing her to prepare for his wedding to a new
wife. She does all this dutifully, her husband tells her that she
has always been and will always be his wife (the divorce was a fraud),
and they live happily ever after. The Merchant reflects on the great difference between
the patient Griselde of the Clerk’s Tale and the horrible shrew
he has been married to for the past two months. The Host asks him
to tell a story of the evils of marriage, and he complies. Against
the advice of his friends, an old knight named January marries May,
a beautiful young woman. She is less than impressed by his enthusiastic
sexual efforts, and conspires to cheat on him with his squire, Damien. When
blind January takes May into his garden to copulate with her, she
tells him she wants to eat a pear, and he helps her up into the
pear tree, where she has sex with Damien. Pluto, the king of the
faeries, restores January’s sight, but May, caught in the act, assures
him that he must still be blind. The Host prays to God to keep him
from marrying a wife like the one the Merchant describes. The Host calls upon the Squire to say something about
his favorite subject, love, and the Squire willingly complies. King
Cambyuskan of the Mongol Empire is visited on his birthday by a
knight bearing gifts from the king of Arabia and India. He gives
Cambyuskan and his daughter Canacee a magic brass horse, a magic
mirror, a magic ring that gives Canacee the ability to understand
the language of birds, and a sword with the power to cure any wound
it creates. She rescues a dying female falcon that narrates how
her consort abandoned her for the love of another. The Squire’s
Tale is either unfinished by Chaucer or is meant to be interrupted
by the Franklin, who interjects that he wishes his own son were
as eloquent as the Squire. The Host expresses annoyance at the Franklin’s
interruption, and orders him to begin the next tale. The Franklin says that his tale is a familiar Breton lay,
a folk ballad of ancient Brittany. Dorigen, the heroine, awaits
the return of her husband, Arveragus, who has gone to England to
win honor in feats of arms. She worries that the ship bringing her
husband home will wreck itself on the coastal rocks, and she promises
Aurelius, a young man who falls in love with her, that she will
give her body to him if he clears the rocks from the coast. Aurelius
hires a student learned in magic to create the illusion that the
rocks have disappeared. Arveragus returns home and tells his wife
that she must keep her promise to Aurelius. Aurelius is so impressed
by Arveragus’s honorable act that he generously absolves her of
the promise, and the magician, in turn, generously absolves Aurelius
of the money he owes. Appius the judge lusts after Virginia, the beautiful daughter
of Virginius. Appius persuades a churl named Claudius to declare
her his slave, stolen from him by Virginius. Appius declares that
Virginius must hand over his daughter to Claudius. Virginius tells
his daughter that she must die rather than suffer dishonor, and
she virtuously consents to her father’s cutting her head off. Appius
sentences Virginius to death, but the Roman people, aware of Appius’s
hijinks, throw him into prison, where he kills himself. The Host is dismayed by the tragic injustice of the Physician’s
Tale, and asks the Pardoner to tell something merry. The other pilgrims contradict
the Host, demanding a moral tale, which the Pardoner agrees to tell
after he eats and drinks. The Pardoner tells the company how he
cheats people out of their money by preaching that money is the
root of all evil. His tale describes three riotous youths who go
looking for Death, thinking that they can kill him. An old man tells
them that they will find Death under a tree. Instead, they find
eight bushels of gold, which they plot to sneak into town under cover
of darkness. The youngest goes into town to fetch food and drink,
but brings back poison, hoping to have the gold all to himself. His
companions kill him to enrich their own shares, then drink the poison
and die under the tree. His tale complete, the Pardoner offers to
sell the pilgrims pardons, and singles out the Host to come kiss
his relics. The Host infuriates the Pardoner by accusing him of
fraud, but the Knight persuades the two to kiss and bury their differences. The Shipman’s Tale features a monk who tricks a merchant’s
wife into having sex with him by borrowing money from the merchant, then
giving it to the wife so she can repay her own debt to her husband,
in exchange for sexual favors. When the monk sees the merchant next,
he tells him that he returned the merchant’s money to his wife.
The wife realizes she has been duped, but she boldly tells her husband
to forgive her debt: she will repay it in bed. The Host praises
the Shipman’s story, and asks the Prioress for a tale. The Prioress calls on the Virgin Mary to guide her tale.
In an Asian city, a Christian school is located at the edge of a
Jewish ghetto. An angelic seven-year-old boy, a widow’s son, attends
the school. He is a devout Christian, and loves to sing Alma
Redemptoris (Gracious Mother of the Redeemer). Singing
the song on his way through the ghetto, some Jews hire a murderer
to slit his throat and throw him into a latrine. The Jews refuse
to tell the widow where her son is, but he miraculously begins to
sing Alma Redemptoris, so the Christian people
recover his body, and the magistrate orders the murdering Jews to
be drawn apart by wild horses and then hanged. The Host, after teasing Chaucer the narrator about his
appearance, asks him to tell a tale. Chaucer says that he only knows
one tale, then launches into a parody of bad poetry—the Tale of
Sir Thopas. Sir Thopas rides about looking for an elf-queen to marry
until he is confronted by a giant. The narrator’s doggerel continues
in this vein until the Host can bear no more and interrupts him.
Chaucer asks him why he can’t tell his tale, since it is the best
he knows, and the Host explains that his rhyme isn’t worth a turd.
He encourages Chaucer to tell a prose tale. Chaucer’s second tale is the long, moral prose story of
Melibee. Melibee’s house is raided by his foes, who beat his wife,
Prudence, and severely wound his daughter, Sophie, in her feet,
hands, ears, nose, and mouth. Prudence advises him not to rashly
pursue vengeance on his enemies, and he follows her advice, putting
his foes’ punishment in her hands. She forgives them for the outrages
done to her, in a model of Christian forbearance and forgiveness. The Host wishes that his own wife were as patient as Melibee’s,
and calls upon the Monk to tell the next tale. First he teases the
Monk, pointing out that the Monk is clearly no poor cloisterer.
The Monk takes it all in stride and tells a series of tragic falls,
in which noble figures are brought low: Lucifer, Adam, Sampson,
Hercules, Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar, Zenobia, Pedro of Castile,
and down through the ages. After seventeen noble “falls” narrated by the Monk, the
Knight interrupts, and the Host calls upon the Nun’s Priest to deliver
something more lively. The Nun’s Priest tells of Chanticleer the
Rooster, who is carried off by a flattering fox who tricks him into
closing his eyes and displaying his crowing abilities. Chanticleer
turns the tables on the fox by persuading him to open his mouth
and brag to the barnyard about his feat, upon which Chanticleer
falls out of the fox’s mouth and escapes. The Host praises the Nun’s
Priest’s Tale, adding that if the Nun’s Priest were not in holy
orders, he would be as sexually potent as Chanticleer. In her Prologue, the Second Nun explains that she will
tell a saint’s life, that of Saint Cecilia, for this saint set an
excellent example through her good works and wise teachings. She
focuses particularly on the story of Saint Cecilia’s martyrdom.
Before Cecilia’s new husband, Valerian, can take her virginity,
she sends him on a pilgrimage to Pope Urban, who converts him to
Christianity. An angel visits Valerian, who asks that his brother
Tiburce be granted the grace of Christian conversion as well. All
three—Cecilia, Tiburce, and Valerian—are put to death by the Romans. When the Second Nun’s Tale is finished, the company is
overtaken by a black-clad Canon and his Yeoman, who have heard of
the pilgrims and their tales and wish to participate. The Yeoman
brags to the company about how he and the Canon create
the illusion that they are alchemists, and the Canon departs in
shame at having his secrets discovered. The Yeoman tells a tale
of how a canon defrauded a priest by creating the illusion of alchemy
using sleight of hand. The Host pokes fun at the Cook, riding at the back of
the company, blind drunk. The Cook is unable to honor the Host’s
request that he tell a tale, and the Manciple criticizes him for
his drunkenness. The Manciple relates the legend of a white crow,
taken from the Roman poet Ovid’s Metamorphoses and
one of the tales in The Arabian Nights. In it,
Phoebus’s talking white crow informs him that his wife is cheating
on him. Phoebus kills the wife, pulls out the crow’s white feathers,
and curses it with blackness. As the company enters a village in the late afternoon,
the Host calls upon the Parson to give them a fable. Refusing to
tell a fictional story because it would go against the rule set
by St. Paul, the Parson delivers a lengthy treatise on the Seven
Deadly Sins, instead. Chaucer appeals to readers to credit Jesus Christ as the
inspiration for anything in his book that they like, and to attribute
what they don’t like to his own ignorance and lack of ability. He
retracts and prays for forgiveness for all of his works dealing
with secular and pagan subjects, asking only to be remembered for
what he has written of saints’ lives and homilies.