Wang Lung is a poor young farmer in
rural, turn-of-the-century China. During the time in which the novel
takes place, Chinese society is showing signs of modernization while
remaining deeply connected to ancient traditions and customs. When
Wang Lung reaches a marriageable age, his father approaches the
powerful local Hwang family to ask if they have a spare slave who
could marry his son. The Hwangs agree to sell Wang a 20-year-old
slave named O-lan, who becomes his wife. O-lan and Wang Lung are
pleased with each other, although they exchange few words and although
Wang is initially disappointed that O-lan does not have bound feet. Together, Wang Lung and O-lan cultivate a bountiful and
profitable harvest from their land. O-lan becomes pregnant, and
Wang Lung is overjoyed when O-lan’s first child is a son. Meanwhile,
the powerful Hwang family lives decadently—the husband is obsessed with
women, and the wife is an opium addict. Because of their costly habits,
the Hwangs fall on hard times, and Wang Lung is able to purchase
a piece of their fertile rice land. He enjoys another profitable
harvest, and O-lan gives birth to another son. Wang Lung’s new wealth
catches the attention of his greedy, lazy uncle. Custom dictates
that Wang Lung must show the utmost respect to members of the older
generation, especially relatives, so he is forced to loan his uncle
money despite knowing that the money will be wasted on drinking
and gambling. The Hwang family’s finances continue to falter, and
the Hwangs sell another tract of land to Wang Lung. After O-lan gives birth to a daughter, a terrible famine
settles on the land. In the midst of this crisis, O-lan gives birth
to another daughter. She strangles the second girl because there
is not enough food to feed the baby and the rest of the family.
Wang Lung is forced to take his family to a southern city for the
winter. There, O-lan and the children beg while Wang Lung earns
money by transporting people in a rented rickshaw. They earn just
enough money to eat. Wang Lung begins to despair of ever making
enough money to return to his land. He and O-lan briefly consider
selling their surviving daughter as a slave. Eventually, a group
of poor and desperate people ransacks a rich man’s home, and Wang
Lung and O-lan join them. Wang Lung steals a pile of gold coins.
With this new wealth, he moves the family back home and purchases
a new ox and some seeds. O-lan had stolen some jewels during the
looting. Wang Lung allows her to keep two small pearls, but he takes
the rest and hurries to buy three hundred acres of Old Master Hwang’s
land. O-lan gives birth to twins shortly thereafter. The couple
realizes that their oldest daughter is severely retarded, but Wang
Lung loves the child dearly. Wang Lung hires laborers to plant and harvest his land.
He enjoys several years of profitable harvests and becomes a rich
man. When a flood forces him to be idle, he begins to feel restless
and bored. He finds fault with O-lan’s appearance and cruelly criticizes her
for having big feet. He becomes obsessed with Lotus, a beautiful,
delicate prostitute with bound feet. Eventually, he purchases Lotus
to be his concubine. When O-lan becomes terminally ill, Wang Lung
regrets his cruel words and comes to appreciate everything his wife
has done for him. Meanwhile, to lessen the demands of his uncle
and his uncle’s wife, who have moved their family into his house
and continued to exploit his wealth, he tricks them into becoming
opium addicts. Eventually, Wang Lung rents the Hwangs’ house and
moves into it with his family, leaving his own house to his uncle’s
family. After O-lan’s death, Wang Lung’s sons begin to rebel
against his plans for their life. They do not want to work as farmers
and do not have his devotion to the land. Furthermore, his first
and second sons often argue over money, and their wives develop
an intense animosity toward one another. In his old age, Wang Lung
takes a young slave, Pear Blossom, as a concubine. She promises
to care for his retarded daughter after his death. In time, Wang
Lung is surrounded by grandchildren, but he is also surrounded by
petty family disagreements. By the end of the novel, despite Wang’s
passionate dissent, his sons plan to sell the family land and divide
the money among themselves, signaling their final break with the
land that made them wealthy.