Chief Bromden, the half-Indian
narrator of One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest, has
been a patient in an Oregon psychiatric hospital for ten years.
His paranoia is evident from the first lines of the book, and he
suffers from hallucinations and delusions. Bromden’s worldview is
dominated by his fear of what he calls the Combine, a huge conglomeration
that controls society and forces people into conformity. Bromden
pretends to be deaf and dumb and tries to go unnoticed, even though
he is six feet seven inches tall. The mental patients, all male, are divided into Acutes,
who can be cured, and Chronics, who cannot be cured. They are ruled
by Nurse Ratched, a former army nurse who runs the ward with harsh, mechanical
precision. During daily Group Meetings, she encourages the Acutes
to attack each other in their most vulnerable places, shaming them
into submission. If a patient rebels, he is sent to receive electroshock
treatments and sometimes a lobotomy, even though both practices
have fallen out of favor with the medical community. When Randle McMurphy arrives as a transfer from the Pendleton
Work Farm, Bromden senses that something is different about him.
McMurphy swaggers into the ward and introduces himself as a gambling
man with a zest for women and cards. After McMurphy experiences
his first Group Meeting, he tells the patients that Nurse Ratched
is a ball-cutter. The other patients tell him that there is no defying
her, because in their eyes she is an all-powerful force. McMurphy
makes a bet that he can make Ratched lose her temper within a week. At first, the confrontations between Ratched and McMurphy provide
entertainment for the other patients. McMurphy’s insubordination,
however, soon stimulates the rest of them into rebellion. The success
of his bet hinges on a failed vote to change the television schedule
to show the World Series, which is on during the time allotted for
cleaning chores. McMurphy stages a protest by sitting in front of
the blank television instead of doing his work, and one by one the
other patients join him. Nurse Ratched loses control and screams
at them. Bromden observes that an outsider would think all of them
were crazy, including the nurse. In Part II, McMurphy, flush with victory, taunts Nurse
Ratched and the staff with abandon. Everyone expects him to get
sent to the Disturbed ward, but Nurse Ratched keeps him in the regular
ward, thinking the patients will soon see that he is just as cowardly
as everyone else. McMurphy eventually learns that involuntarily
committed patients are stuck in the hospital until the staff decides
they are cured. When McMurphy realizes that he is at Nurse Ratched’s mercy,
he begins to submit to her authority. By this time, however, he
has unintentionally become the leader for the other patients, and they
are confused when he stops standing up for them. Cheswick, dismayed
when McMurphy fails to join him in a stand against Nurse Ratched,
drowns in the pool in a possible suicide. Cheswick’s death signals to McMurphy that he has unwittingly taken
on the responsibility of rehabilitating the other patients. He also
witnesses the harsh reality of electroshock therapy and becomes
genuinely frightened by the power wielded by the staff. The weight
of his obligation to the other patients and his fear for his own
life begins to wear down his strength and his sanity. Nevertheless,
in Part III, McMurphy arranges a fishing trip for himself and ten
other patients. He shows them how to defuse the hostility of the outside
world and enables them to feel powerful and masculine as they catch
large fish without his help. He also arranges for Billy Bibbit to
lose his virginity later in the novel, by making a date between Billy
and Candy Starr, a prostitute from Portland. Back on the ward in Part IV, McMurphy reignites the rebellion by
getting into a fistfight with the aides to defend George Sorenson. Bromden
joins in, and they are both sent to the Disturbed ward for electroshock
therapy. McMurphy acts as if the shock treatments do not affect
him, and his heroic reputation grows. Nurse Ratched brings him back
to the ward so the other patients can see his weakened state. The
patients urge McMurphy to escape, but he has arranged Billy’s date
for that night, and he refuses to let Billy down. McMurphy bribes
Mr. Turkle, the night aide, to sneak Candy into the hospital, and
they have a party on the ward. Billy has sex with Candy while McMurphy
and the other patients smoke marijuana and drink. Harding tries
to get McMurphy to escape with Candy and Sandy to Mexico, but McMurphy
is too wasted and falls asleep. The aides discover the mess the next morning, setting
off a series of violent events. When Nurse Ratched finds Billy with
Candy, she threatens to tell Billy’s mother. Billy becomes hysterical
and commits suicide by cutting his throat. McMurphy attacks Ratched,
ripping open the front of her dress and attempting to strangle her.
In retaliation, she has him lobotomized, and he returns to the ward
as a vegetable. However, Ratched has lost her tyrannical power over the
ward. The patients transfer to other wards or check themselves out
of the hospital. Bromden suffocates McMurphy in his bed, enabling
him to die with some dignity rather than live as a symbol of Ratched’s
power. Bromden, having recovered the immense strength that he had
believed lost during his time in the mental ward, escapes from the
hospital by breaking through a window.