After Helen Schlegel's brief romance with Paul 
Wilcox ends badly, the cultured, idealistic 
Schlegel family thinks it they will have nothing 
further to do with the materialistic, commerce-obsessed Wilcoxes.  The Schlegels 
continue with their 
intellectual lives.  At a performance of Beethoven's 
Fifth Symphony, they meet an impoverished insurance 
clerk named Leonard Bast, who regards them with 
general suspicion when Helen accidentally steals his 
umbrella.  The Schlegels are shocked when the 
Wilcoxes move from their country estate of Howards 
End to a London flat opposite their home on 
Wickham Place in London.  But Paul has left to win 
his fortune in Nigeria, and Helen is vacationing with 
her cousin Frieda in Germany, so there is little 
danger of an unpleasant scene.  Margaret, Helen's 
older sister and the head of the family, even 
befriends Mrs. Wilcox; they go Christmas shopping 
together, and Margaret throws a luncheon for the 
ethereal, selfless Mrs. Wilcox. When Mrs. Wilcox dies not long afterward, she leaves 
a handwritten note behind asking that Howards End be 
given to Margaret.  But her pragmatic husband, 
Henry, a prominent businessman, and her greedy 
son Charles, a struggling businessman, refuse to 
act on the matter and never mention it to Margaret.  
One night, Margaret and Helen run into Henry, 
and they discuss the case of Leonard Bast; Henry 
warns them that Leonard's insurance company is doomed 
to failure, and they advise him to find a 
new job.  But poor Leonard, who associates the 
Schlegels with all things cultural and romantic--he 
reads constantly, hoping to better himself--resents 
this intrusion into his business life and accuses 
them of trying to profit from his knowledge of the 
insurance industry. Margaret and Henry develop a halting, gradual 
friendship.  When the lease expires at Wickham Place, 
the Schlegels begin looking for another house (their 
landlord wants to follow the general trend and 
replace their house with a more profitable apartment 
building).  Henry offers to rent them a house he owns 
in London, and when he shows it to Margaret, he 
suddenly proposes to her.  She is surprised by her 
happiness, and after considering 
the proposal, she accepts. Shortly before Margaret and Henry are scheduled to be 
married, Henry's daughter Evie marries a man 
named Percy Cahill; the wedding is held at a 
Wilcox estate near Wales.  After the party, which 
Margaret finds quite unpleasant, Helen arrives in a 
disheveled state, with the Basts in tow.  She 
declares indignantly that Leonard has left his old 
company, found a new job, and been summarily fired; 
he is now without an income.  Helen angrily blames 
Henry for his ill-considered advice.  Margaret asks 
Henry to give Leonard a job, but when he sees Jacky 
Bast, he realizes that he had an affair with her 
10 years ago, when she was a prostitute in Cyprus.  
Margaret forgives him for the indiscretion--it was 
before they even met--but she writes to Helen that 
there will be no job for Leonard. Helen and the Basts have retired to a hotel in town, 
and after Jacky goes to sleep, Helen and Leonard stay 
up discussing Helen's philosophical observations 
about life.  After Margaret's note arrives, a feeling 
of tragedy descends on their conversation, and they 
make love--an unwelcome development for both of them:  
Leonard is wracked with guilt, and Helen becomes 
pregnant.  She leaves for Germany the following 
morning, and both she and Leonard recede from 
Margaret's life.  Margaret and Henry are married, and 
plan to build a new home in Sussex. After some time passes, however, Margaret begins to 
worry about her sister, and with Henry's help, she 
arranges a scheme to surprise her at Howards End, 
where Helen is going to collect some books.  (The 
Schlegels' belongings are being stored at Howards 
End.)  Here, Margaret sees Helen's advanced 
pregnancy, and is filled with love and tenderness for 
her sister.  Helen asks to spend the night with 
Margaret at Howards End, but Henry refuses to let a 
"fallen woman" sleep in his home.  When Margaret 
points out that Henry himself has committed a worse 
sexual indiscretion than Helen, Henry is outraged, 
and Margaret resolves to leave him, returning to 
Germany with Helen. In the meantime, Leonard decides to confess 
to Margaret what happened, and he travels to 
Howards End the morning after Margaret and Helen 
sleep there.  When he arrives, he is beaten by 
Charles Wilcox with the flat of a sword, and a 
bookcase falls on him.  Leonard has a heart attack 
and dies.  After the inquest, Charles is charged with 
manslaughter and sentenced to three years in prison.  
Henry is shattered, and comes to Margaret for help.  
Henry, Margaret, and Helen move into Howards End, 
where Helen and Henry learn to be friends and where 
Helen's son is born.  Fourteen months later, they are 
still living there happily.