A boy grapples with the death of a priest, Father Flynn.
With his aunt, the boy views the corpse and visits with the priest’s
mourning sisters. As the boy listens, the sisters explain Father
Flynn’s death to the aunt and share thoughts about Father Flynn’s
increasingly strange behavior. Fed up with the restraints of school and inspired by adventure
stories, two boys skip their classes to explore Dublin. After walking around
the city for a while, the unnamed narrator and his friend, Mahony,
eventually rest in a field. A strange old man approaches and talks
to them, and his sexual innuendos make the narrator uncomfortable.
Ultimately, the narrator and Mahony manage to escape. A young boy falls in love with his neighbor Mangan’s sister.
He spends his time watching her from his house or thinking about
her. He and the girl finally talk, and she suggests that he visit
a bazaar called Araby, which she cannot attend. The boy plans to
go and purchase something for the girl, but he arrives late and
buys nothing. A young woman, Eveline, sits in her house and reviews
her decision to elope with her lover, Frank, to Argentina. Eveline
wonders if she has made the correct choice to leave her home and
family. As the moment of departure approaches, she reaffirms her
decision, but changes her mind at the docks and abandons Frank. Jimmy Doyle spends an evening and night with his well-connected foreign
friends after watching a car race outside of Dublin. Upon returning
to the city, they meet for a fancy meal and then spend hours drinking,
dancing, and playing card games. Intoxicated and infatuated with
the wealth and prestige of his companions, Jimmy ends the celebrations
broke. Lenehan and Corley walk through Dublin and discuss their
plot to swindle a housemaid who works at a wealthy residence. Corley meets
with the girl while Lenehan drifts through the city and eats a cheap
meal. Later in the night Lenehan goes to the residence as planned
and sees the girl retrieve something from the house for Corley.
Finally Corley reveals to Lenehan that she procured a gold coin for
him. In the boarding house that she runs, Mrs. Mooney observes
the courtship between her daughter, Polly, and a tenant, Mr. Doran. Mrs.
Mooney intercedes only when she knows Mr. Doran must propose to
Polly, and she schedules a meeting with Mr. Doran to discuss his
intentions. Mr. Doran anxiously anticipates the conversation and
the potential lifestyle change that awaits him. He resolves that he
must marry Polly. One evening after work Little Chandler reunites with his
old friend, Gallaher. Little Chandler aspires to be a poet, and
hearing about Gallaher’s career in London makes Little Chandler
envious and determined to change his life. Little Chandler imagines
freedom from his wife and child, but he feels ashamed about his
thoughts and accepts his situation. After an infuriating day at work, Farrington embarks on
an evening of drinking with his friends. Even though Farrington
pawns his watch to replenish his empty wallet, he finds himself
spending all of his money on drinks for himself and his companions.
Growing more and more frustrated, Farrington almost explodes when
he loses an arm-wrestling match. At home later that night, Farrington
vents his anger by beating his son. On Halloween night, Maria oversees festivities at the
charity where she works. Afterward, she travels to the home of Joe
Donnelly, whom she nursed when he was a boy. Along the way Maria
purchases sweets and cakes for Joe’s family. When she arrives at
the house, she realizes she has somehow lost the special plum cake
she’d bought. After talking, eating, and playing Halloween games,
Maria sings a song for the Donnellys. Mr. Duffy develops a relationship with Mrs. Sinico at
a concert in Dublin. The two meet often for long chats and become
close, but Mr. Duffy cuts off the relationship when Mrs. Sinico
makes the intimate but chaste gesture of taking Mr. Duffy’s hand
and putting it against her cheek. Four years later, Mr. Duffy reads
in a newspaper that Mrs. Sinico has died in a train accident. He
feels angry, sad, and uneasy as he remembers her, and he finally
realizes he lost perhaps his only chance for love. A group of men working as street promoters for a mayoral
candidate meet to discuss their jobs and escape from the rainy weather
on Ivy Day, which commemorates the death of Charles Stuart Parnell, the
influential Irish politician. The men complain about their late paychecks
and debate politics. Conversation eventually turns to Parnell and
his political endeavors, and one of the men, Hynes, recites a poem
he wrote in memory of him. An Irish cultural society organizes a concert series with
the help of Mrs. Kearney, the mother of one of the performers. Mrs.
Kearney secures a contract with the society’s secretary, Mr. Holohan,
so that her daughter is ensured payment for her piano accompaniment.
A series of logistical changes and failed expectations infuriate
Mrs. Kearney, and she hounds the officers of the society for the
money, making a spectacle of herself and her daughter. After an embarrassing public accident, Tom Kernan is convinced
by his friends to attend a Catholic retreat. The men hope that this
event will help Mr. Kernan reform his problematic, alcoholic lifestyle.
At the service, the presiding priest preaches about the need for
the admission of sins and the ability of all people to attain forgiveness through
God’s grace. With his wife, Gretta, Gabriel Conroy attends the annual
dancing party hosted by his two aging aunts, Julia and Kate Morkan,
and their niece, Mary Jane. At the party, Gabriel experiences some uncomfortable
confrontations. He makes a personal comment to Lily, the housemaid,
that provokes a sharp reply, and during a dance he endures the taunts
of his partner, Miss Ivors. Finally, Gabriel sees Gretta enraptured
by a song sung toward the end of the party. Later, he learns that
she was thinking of a former lover who had died for her. He sadly
contemplates his life.