The poor peddler John Durbeyfield is
stunned to learn that he is the descendent of an ancient noble family, the
d’Urbervilles. Meanwhile, Tess, his eldest daughter, joins the other
village girls in the May Day dance, where Tess briefly exchanges
glances with a young man. Mr. Durbeyfield and his wife decide to
send Tess to the d’Urberville mansion, where they hope Mrs. d’Urberville
will make Tess’s fortune. In reality, Mrs. d’Urberville is no relation
to Tess at all: her husband, the merchant Simon Stokes, simply changed
his name to d’Urberville after he retired. But Tess does not know
this fact, and when the lascivious Alec d’Urberville, Mrs. d’Urberville’s
son, procures Tess a job tending fowls on the d’Urberville estate,
Tess has no choice but to accept, since she blames herself for an
accident involving the family’s horse, its only means of income. Tess spends several months at this job, resisting Alec’s
attempts to seduce her. Finally, Alec takes advantage of her in
the woods one night after a fair. Tess knows she does not love Alec.
She returns home to her family to give birth to Alec’s child, whom
she christens Sorrow. Sorrow dies soon after he is born, and Tess
spends a miserable year at home before deciding to seek work elsewhere.
She finally accepts a job as a milkmaid at the Talbothays Dairy. At Talbothays, Tess enjoys a period of contentment and
happiness. She befriends three of her fellow milkmaids—Izz, Retty,
and Marian—and meets a man named Angel Clare, who turns out to be the
man from the May Day dance at the beginning of the novel. Tess and
Angel slowly fall in love. They grow closer throughout Tess’s time
at Talbothays, and she eventually accepts his proposal of marriage.
Still, she is troubled by pangs of conscience and feels she should
tell Angel about her past. She writes him a confessional note and
slips it under his door, but it slides under the carpet and Angel never
sees it. After their wedding, Angel and Tess both confess indiscretions: Angel
tells Tess about an affair he had with an older woman in London,
and Tess tells Angel about her history with Alec. Tess forgives Angel,
but Angel cannot forgive Tess. He gives her some money and boards
a ship bound for Brazil, where he thinks he might establish a farm.
He tells Tess he will try to accept her past but warns her not to try
to join him until he comes for her. Tess struggles. She has a difficult time finding work
and is forced to take a job at an unpleasant and unprosperous farm.
She tries to visit Angel’s family but overhears his brothers discussing
Angel’s poor marriage, so she leaves. She hears a wandering preacher
speak and is stunned to discover that he is Alec d’Urberville, who
has been converted to Christianity by Angel’s father, the Reverend
Clare. Alec and Tess are each shaken by their encounter, and Alec
appallingly begs Tess never to tempt him again. Soon after, however,
he again begs Tess to marry him, having turned his back on his -religious
ways. Tess learns from her sister Liza-Lu that her mother is
near death, and Tess is forced to return home to take care of her.
Her mother recovers, but her father unexpectedly dies soon after.
When the family is evicted from their home, Alec offers help. But
Tess refuses to accept, knowing he only wants to obligate her to
him again. At last, Angel decides to forgive his wife. He leaves
Brazil, desperate to find her. Instead, he finds her mother, who
tells him Tess has gone to a village called Sandbourne. There, he
finds Tess in an expensive boardinghouse called The Herons, where
he tells her he has forgiven her and begs her to take him back.
Tess tells him he has come too late. She was unable to resist and
went back to Alec d’Urberville. Angel leaves in a daze, and, heartbroken
to the point of madness, Tess goes upstairs and stabs her lover
to death. When the landlady finds Alec’s body, she raises an alarm,
but Tess has already fled to find Angel. Angel agrees to help Tess, though he cannot quite believe
that she has actually murdered Alec. They hide out in an empty mansion
for a few days, then travel farther. When they come to Stonehenge,
Tess goes to sleep, but when morning breaks shortly thereafter,
a search party discovers them. Tess is arrested and sent to jail.
Angel and Liza-Lu watch as a black flag is raised over the prison,
signaling Tess’s execution.