A recurring dream troubles Santiago, a young and adventurous Andalusian shepherd.
            He has the dream every time he sleeps under a sycamore tree that grows out of the ruins
            of a church. During the dream, a child tells him to seek treasure at the foot of the
            Egyptian pyramids. Santiago consults a gypsy woman to interpret the dream, and to his
            surprise she tells him to go to Egypt. A strange, magical old man named Melchizedek, who
            claims to be the King of Salem, echoes the gypsy’s advice and tells Santiago that it is
            his Personal Legend to journey to the pyramids. Melchizedek convinces Santiago to sell
            his flock and set off to Tangier. When Santiago arrives in Tangier, a thief robs him,
            forcing him to find work with a local crystal merchant. The conservative and kindly
            merchant teaches Santiago several lessons, and Santiago encourages the merchant to take
            risks with his business. The risks pay off, and Santiago becomes a rich man in just a
            year. Santiago decides to cash in his earnings and continue pursuing his Personal
            Legend: to find treasure at the pyramids. He joins a caravan crossing the Sahara desert
            toward Egypt and meets an Englishman who is studying to become an alchemist. He learns a
            lot from the Englishman during the journey. For one, he learns that the secret of
            alchemy is written on a stone called the Emerald Tablet. The ultimate creation of
            alchemy is the Master Work, which consists of a solid called the Philosophers Stone that
            can turn lead to gold, and a liquid called the Elixir of Life that can cure all ills.
            Santiago learns the Englishman is traveling with the caravan to the Saharan oasis of
            Al-Fayoum, where a powerful, 200-year-old alchemist resides. The Englishman plans to ask
            the alchemist the secret of his trade. As it turns out, the caravan must make an extended stop in Al-Fayoum in order to
            avoid increasingly violent tribal wars taking place in the desert. There, Santiago falls
            in love with Fatima, who lives at the oasis. During a walk in the desert, Santiago
            witnesses an omen that portends an attack on the historically neutral oasis. He warns
            the tribal chieftains of the attack, and as a result, Al-Fayoum successfully defends
            itself against the assault. The alchemist gets word of Santiago’s vision and invites
            Santiago on a trip into the desert, during which he teaches Santiago about the
            importance of listening to his heart and pursuing his Personal Legend. He convinces
            Santiago to leave Fatima and the caravan for the time to finish his journey to the
            pyramids, and he offers to accompany Santiago on the next leg of his trip. While the alchemist and Santiago continue through the desert, the alchemist shares
            much of his wisdom about the Soul of the World. They are mere days away from the
            pyramids when a tribe of Arab soldiers captures them. In exchange for his life and the
            life of Santiago, the alchemist hands over to the tribe all of Santiago’s money and
            tells the soldiers that Santiago is a powerful alchemist who will turn into wind within
            three days. Santiago feels alarmed because he has no idea how to turn into the wind, and
            over the next three days he contemplates the desert. On the third day, he communicates
            with the wind and the sun and coaxes them to help him create a tremendous sandstorm. He
            prays to the Hand That Wrote All, and at the height of the storm he disappears. He
            reappears on the other side of the camp, and the tribesmen, awed by the power of the
            storm and by Santiago’s ability, let him and the alchemist go free. The alchemist continues to travel with Santiago as far as a Coptic monastery
            several hours from the pyramids. There, he demonstrates to Santiago his ability to turn
            lead into gold using the Philosopher’s Stone. He gives Santiago gold and sends him off.
            Santiago begins digging for the treasure at the foot of the pyramids, but two men accost
            him and beat him. When Santiago speaks to them about his dream vision, they decide he
            must have no money and let him live. Before leaving, one of the men tries to illustrate
            the worthlessness of dreams by telling Santiago about his own dream. It concerns a
            treasure buried in an abandoned church in Spain where a sycamore tree grows. The church
            is the same one in which Santiago had his original dream, and he finally understands
            where his treasure is. He returns to Spain to find a chest of jewels and gold buried
            under the tree, and plans to return with it to Al-Fayoum, where he will reunite with
            Fatima, who awaits him.