The news that a wealthy young
gentleman named Charles Bingley has rented the manor
of Netherfield Park causes a great stir in the nearby village of
Longbourn, especially in the Bennet household. The Bennets have
five unmarried daughters—from oldest to youngest, Jane, Elizabeth,
Mary, Kitty, and Lydia—and Mrs. Bennet is desperate to see them
all married. After Mr. Bennet pays a social visit to Mr. Bingley,
the Bennets attend a ball at which Mr. Bingley is present. He is taken
with Jane and spends much of the evening dancing with her. His close
friend, Mr. Darcy, is less pleased with the evening and haughtily
refuses to dance with Elizabeth, which makes everyone view him as
arrogant and obnoxious. At social functions over subsequent weeks, however, Mr.
Darcy finds himself increasingly attracted to Elizabeth’s charm
and intelligence. Jane’s friendship with Mr. Bingley also continues
to burgeon, and Jane pays a visit to the Bingley mansion. On her
journey to the house she is caught in a downpour and catches ill,
forcing her to stay at Netherfield for several days. In order to
tend to Jane, Elizabeth hikes through muddy fields and arrives with
a spattered dress, much to the disdain of the snobbish Miss Bingley,
Charles Bingley’s sister. Miss Bingley’s spite only increases when
she notices that Darcy, whom she is pursuing, pays quite a bit of
attention to Elizabeth. When Elizabeth and Jane return home, they find Mr. Collins
visiting their household. Mr. Collins is a young clergyman who stands to
inherit Mr. Bennet’s property, which has been “entailed,” meaning
that it can only be passed down to male heirs. Mr. Collins is a pompous
fool, though he is quite enthralled by the Bennet girls. Shortly
after his arrival, he makes a proposal of marriage to Elizabeth.
She turns him down, wounding his pride. Meanwhile, the Bennet girls
have become friendly with militia officers stationed in a nearby
town. Among them is Wickham, a handsome young soldier who is friendly
toward Elizabeth and tells her how Darcy cruelly cheated him out
of an inheritance. At the beginning of winter, the Bingleys and Darcy leave
Netherfield and return to London, much to Jane’s dismay. A further
shock arrives with the news that Mr. Collins has become engaged
to Charlotte Lucas, Elizabeth’s best friend and the poor daughter
of a local knight. Charlotte explains to Elizabeth that she is getting
older and needs the match for financial reasons. Charlotte and Mr.
Collins get married and Elizabeth promises to visit them at their
new home. As winter progresses, Jane visits the city to see friends
(hoping also that she might see Mr. Bingley). However, Miss Bingley
visits her and behaves rudely, while Mr. Bingley fails to visit
her at all. The marriage prospects for the Bennet girls appear bleak. That spring, Elizabeth visits Charlotte, who now lives
near the home of Mr. Collins’s patron, Lady Catherine de Bourgh,
who is also Darcy’s aunt. Darcy calls on Lady Catherine and encounters Elizabeth,
whose presence leads him to make a number of visits to the Collins’s
home, where she is staying. One day, he makes a shocking proposal
of marriage, which Elizabeth quickly refuses. She tells Darcy that
she considers him arrogant and unpleasant, then scolds him for steering
Bingley away from Jane and disinheriting Wickham. Darcy leaves her
but shortly thereafter delivers a letter to her. In this letter,
he admits that he urged Bingley to distance himself from Jane, but
claims he did so only because he thought their romance was not serious.
As for Wickham, he informs Elizabeth that the young officer is a
liar and that the real cause of their disagreement was Wickham’s
attempt to elope with his young sister, Georgiana Darcy. This letter causes Elizabeth to reevaluate
her feelings about Darcy. She returns home and acts coldly toward
Wickham. The militia is leaving town, which makes the younger, rather
man-crazy Bennet girls distraught. Lydia manages to obtain permission
from her father to spend the summer with an old colonel in Brighton,
where Wickham’s regiment will be stationed. With the arrival of
June, Elizabeth goes on another journey, this time with the Gardiners,
who are relatives of the Bennets. The trip takes her to the North
and eventually to the neighborhood of Pemberley, Darcy’s estate.
She visits Pemberley, after making sure that Darcy is away, and
delights in the building and grounds, while hearing from Darcy’s
servants that he is a wonderful, generous master. Suddenly, Darcy
arrives and behaves cordially toward her. Making no mention of his
proposal, he entertains the Gardiners and invites Elizabeth to meet
his sister. Shortly thereafter, however, a letter arrives from home,
telling Elizabeth that Lydia has eloped with Wickham and that the
couple is nowhere to be found, which suggests that they may be living together
out of wedlock. Fearful of the disgrace such a situation would bring
on her entire family, Elizabeth hastens home. Mr. Gardiner and Mr.
Bennet go off to search for Lydia, but Mr. Bennet eventually returns
home empty-handed. Just when all hope seems lost, a letter comes
from Mr. Gardiner saying that the couple has been found and that
Wickham has agreed to marry Lydia in exchange for an annual income.
The Bennets are convinced that Mr. Gardiner has paid off Wickham,
but Elizabeth learns that the source of the money, and of her family’s
salvation, was none other than Darcy. Now married, Wickham and Lydia return to Longbourn briefly, where
Mr. Bennet treats them coldly. They then depart for Wickham’s new
assignment in the North of England. Shortly thereafter, Bingley
returns to Netherfield and resumes his courtship of Jane. Darcy
goes to stay with him and pays visits to the Bennets but makes no
mention of his desire to marry Elizabeth. Bingley, on the other hand,
presses his suit and proposes to Jane, to the delight of everyone
but Bingley’s haughty sister. While the family celebrates, Lady Catherine
de Bourgh pays a visit to Longbourn. She corners Elizabeth and says
that she has heard that Darcy, her nephew, is planning to marry
her. Since she considers a Bennet an unsuitable match for a Darcy,
Lady Catherine demands that Elizabeth promise to refuse him. Elizabeth
spiritedly refuses, saying she is not engaged to Darcy, but she
will not promise anything against her own happiness. A little later,
Elizabeth and Darcy go out walking together and he tells her that
his feelings have not altered since the spring. She tenderly accepts
his proposal, and both Jane and Elizabeth are married.