All Quiet on the Western Front is
narrated by Paul Bäumer, a young man of nineteen who fights in the
German army on the French front in World War I. Paul and several
of his friends from school joined the army voluntarily after listening
to the stirring patriotic speeches of their teacher, Kantorek. But
after experiencing ten weeks of brutal training at the hands of
the petty, cruel Corporal Himmelstoss and the unimaginable brutality
of life on the front, Paul and his friends have realized that the
ideals of nationalism and patriotism for which they enlisted are
simply empty clichés. They no longer believe that war is
glorious or honorable, and they live in constant physical terror. When Paul’s company receives a short reprieve after two
weeks of fighting, only eighty men of the original 150-man
company return from the front. The cook doesn’t want to give the
survivors the rations that were meant for the dead men but eventually
agrees to do so; the men thus enjoy a large meal. Paul and his friends
visit Kemmerich, a former classmate who has recently had a leg amputated
after contracting gangrene. Kemmerich is slowly dying, and Müller,
another former classmate, wants Kemmerich’s boots for himself. Paul
doesn’t consider Müller insensitive; like the other soldiers, Müller
simply realizes pragmatically that Kemmerich no longer needs his
boots. Surviving the agony of war, Paul observes, forces one to
learn to disconnect oneself from emotions like grief, sympathy,
and fear. Not long after this encounter, Paul returns to Kemmerich’s
bedside just as the young man dies. At Kemmerich’s request, Paul
takes his boots to Müller. A group of new recruits comes to reinforce
the company, and Paul’s friend Kat produces a beef and bean stew
that impresses them. Kat says that if all the men in an army, including
the officers, were paid the same wage and given the same food, wars would
be over immediately. Kropp, another of Paul’s former classmates,
says that there should be no armies; he argues that a nation’s leaders
should instead fight out their disagreements with clubs. They discuss
the fact that petty, insignificant people become powerful and arrogant
during war, and Tjaden, a member of Paul’s company, announces that
the cruel Corporal Himmelstoss has come to fight at the front. At night, the men go on a harrowing mission to lay barbed
wire at the front. Pounded by artillery, they hide in a graveyard,
where the force of the shelling causes the buried corpses to emerge
from their graves, as groups of living men fall dead around them.
After this gruesome event, the surviving soldiers return to their
camp, where they kill lice and think about what they will do at
the end of the war. Some of the men have tentative plans, but all
of them seem to feel that the war will never end. Paul fears that
if the war did end, he wouldn’t know what to do with himself. Himmelstoss
arrives at the front; when the men see him, Tjaden insults
him. The men’s lieutenant gives them light punishment but also lectures
Himmelstoss about the futility of saluting at the front. Paul and
Kat find a house with a goose and roast the goose for supper, enjoying
a rare good meal. The company is caught in a bloody battle with a charging
group of Allied infantrymen. Men are blown apart, limbs are severed
from torsos, and giant rats pick at the dead and the wounded. Paul
feels that he must become an animal in battle, trusting only his
instincts to keep him alive. After the battle, only thirty-two of
eighty men are still alive. The men are given a short reprieve at
a field depot. Paul and some of his friends go for a swim, which
ends in a rendezvous with a group of French girls. Paul desperately
wishes to recapture his innocence with a girl, but he feels that
it is impossible to do so. Paul receives seventeen days of leave and goes home to
see his family. He feels awkward and oppressed in his hometown,
unable to discuss his traumatic experiences with anyone. He learns
that his mother is dying of cancer and that Kantorek has been conscripted
as a soldier, from which he derives a certain cold satisfaction.
He visits Kemmerich’s mother and tells her, untruthfully, that her
son’s death was instant and painless. At the end of his leave, Paul
spends some time at a training camp near a group of Russian prisoners-of-war. Paul
feels that the Russians are people just like him, not subhuman enemies,
and wonders how war can make enemies of people who have no grudge
against one another. Paul is sent back to his company and is reunited with
his friends. The kaiser, the German emperor, pays a visit to the
front, and the men are disappointed to see that he is merely a short
man with a weak voice. In battle, Paul is separated from his company
and forced to hide in a shell hole. A French soldier jumps into
the shell hole with him, and Paul instinctively stabs him. As the
man dies a slow, painful death, Paul is overcome with remorse for
having hurt him. He feels again that this enemy soldier
is no enemy at all but rather a victim of war just like himself.
Paul looks through the soldier’s things and finds that his name
was Gérard Duval and learns that Duval had a wife and child at home.
When he returns to his company, Paul recounts the incident to his
friends, who try to console him. Paul and his friends are given an easy assignment:
for three weeks, they are to guard a supply depot away from the
fighting. When the next battle takes place, Paul and Kropp are wounded
and forced to bribe a sergeant-major with cigars in order to be
placed on the hospital train together. At the hospital, Paul undergoes
surgery. Kropp’s leg is amputated, and he becomes extremely depressed.
After his surgery, Paul has a short leave at home before he returns
to his company. As the German army begins to give in to the unrelenting
pressure of the Allied forces, Paul’s friends are killed in combat
one by one. Detering, one of Paul’s close friends, attempts to desert
but is caught and court-martialed. Kat is killed when a piece of
shrapnel slices his head open while Paul is carrying him to safety.
By the fall of 1918, Paul is the only one
of his circle of friends who is still alive. Soldiers everywhere
whisper that the Germans will soon surrender and that peace will
come. Paul is poisoned in a gas attack and given a short leave.
He reflects that, when the war ends, he will be ruined for peacetime;
all he knows is the war. In October 1918,
on a day with very little fighting, Paul is killed. The army report
for that day reads simply: “All quiet on the Western Front.” Paul’s
corpse wears a calm expression, as though relieved that the end
has come at last.