Frederick Douglass was born into
slavery sometime in 1817 or 1818.
Like many slaves, he is unsure of his exact date of birth. Douglass
is separated from his mother, Harriet Bailey, soon after he is born.
His father is most likely their white master, Captain Anthony. Captain
Anthony is the clerk of a rich man named Colonel Lloyd. Lloyd owns
hundreds of slaves, who call his large, central plantation the “Great
House Farm.” Life on any of Lloyd’s plantations, like that on many
Southern plantations, is brutal. Slaves are overworked and exhausted, receive
little food, few articles of clothing, and no beds. Those who break
rules—and even those who do not—are beaten or whipped, and sometimes
even shot by the plantation overseers, the cruelest of which are
Mr. Severe and Mr. Austin Gore. Douglass’s life on this plantation is not as hard as that
of most of the other slaves. Being a child, he serves in the household
instead of in the fields. At the age of seven, he is given to Captain
Anthony’s son‑in‑law’s brother, Hugh Auld, who lives in Baltimore.
In Baltimore, Douglass enjoys a relatively freer life. In general,
city slave-owners are more conscious of appearing cruel or neglectful
toward their slaves in front of their non‑slaveowning neighbors. Sophia Auld, Hugh’s wife, has never had slaves before,
and therefore she is surprisingly kind to Douglass at first. She
even begins to teach Douglass to read, until her husband orders
her to stop, saying that education makes slaves unmanageable. Eventually,
Sophia succumbs to the mentality of slaveowning and loses her natural
kindliness. Though Sophia and Hugh Auld become crueler toward him, Douglass
still likes Baltimore and is able to teach himself to read with
the help of local boys. As he learns to read and write, Douglass becomes
conscious of the evils of slavery and of the existence of the abolitionist,
or antisla-very, movement. He resolves to escape to the North eventually. After the deaths of Captain Anthony and his remaining
heirs, Douglass is taken back to serve Thomas Auld, Captain Anthony’s son‑in‑law.
Auld is a mean man made harsher by his false religious piety. Auld
considers Douglass unmanageable, so Auld rents him for one year
to Edward Covey, a man known for “breaking” slaves. Covey manages,
in the first six months, to work and whip all the spirit out of
Douglass. Douglass becomes a brutish man, no longer interested in
reading or freedom, capable only of resting from his injuries and
exhaustion. The turning point comes when Douglass resolves to fight
back against Covey. The two men have a two‑hour fight, after which
Covey never touches Douglass again. His year with Covey over, Douglass is next rented to William Freeland
for two years. Though Freeland is a milder, fairer man, Douglass’s
will to escape is nonetheless renewed. At Freeland’s, Douglass begins
edu-cating his fellow slaves in a Sabbath school at the homes of
free blacks. Despite the threat of punishment and violence they
face, many slaves from neighboring farms come to Douglass and work
diligently to learn. At Freeland’s, Douglass also forms a plan of
escape with three fellow slaves with whom he is close. Someone betrays
their plan to Freeland, however, and Douglass and the others are
taken to jail. Thomas Auld then sends Douglass back to Baltimore
with Hugh Auld, to learn the trade of ship caulking. In Baltimore’s trade industry, Douglass runs up against
strained race relations. White workers have been working alongside
free black workers, but the whites have begun to fear that the increasing numbers
of free blacks will take their jobs. Though only an apprentice and
still a slave, Douglass encounters violent tactics of intimidation
from his white coworkers and is forced to switch shipyards. In his
new apprenticeship, Douglass quickly learns the trade of caulking
and soon earns the highest wages possible, always turning them over
to Hugh Auld. Eventually, Douglass receives permission from Hugh Auld
to hire out his extra time. He saves money bit by bit and eventually makes
his escape to New York. Douglass refrains from describing the details
of his escape in order to protect the safety of future slaves who
may attempt the journey. In New York, Douglass fears recapture and
changes his name from Bailey to Douglass. Soon after, he marries
Anna Murray, a free woman he met while in Baltimore. They move north
to Massachusetts, where Douglass becomes deeply engaged with the
abolitionist movement as both a writer and an orator.