Gerda Weissmann Klein’s story begins on September 3, 1939, when she is
fifteen. This day, she says, was the beginning of a tragedy that lasted six years.
She is living in Bielitz, Poland, the town of her birth, and she reacts with horror
as she watches her neighbors greet the invading Nazis with joy. The family had been
trying to hide the possibility of war from Gerda’s father because he was ill and
they didn’t want to upset him. Once their town is invaded, though, they can no
longer keep it a secret from him. Sanctions start being imposed on the Jews, and
Jewish men are being abducted by the Nazis. In October, Gerda’s brother, Arthur, is forced to leave in a Nazi transport
with all of the other young men in town. Gerda never sees him again, although she
receives letters from him throughout much of the war. The situation becomes more and
more dire for the Jews, as their Aryan neighbors take advantage of the situation as
much as they can, buying their possessions for a fraction of their worth and taking
over the factories they own. The Weissmanns are forced to switch homes with their
laundress, who has been living in their basement, and not long after, they are told
they will soon be forced to move into a Jewish ghetto. Gerda travels with her
childhood friend Ilse to visit a camp for young Jewish men and meets Abek
Feigenblatt, who quickly falls in love with her, although his feelings are not
reciprocated. Gerda thinks of Abek is a friend and nothing more. Gerda becomes increasingly aware of how truly horrifying the situation has
gotten when she receives a letter from her friend Erika, telling her how her mother,
baby brother, and boyfriend were forced to lie naked on the cobblestones of their
town and were then trampled to death by Nazis on horseback. In 1942, the family is forced into a Jewish ghetto and ordered to work for the
German war effort. However, it is not long before all the Jews are told they will be
moved out of town so Bielitz can be Judenrein—free of Jews. Gerda
is separated from her parents and never sees them again. Gerda goes to a transit camp in Sosnowitz, where Abek’s family makes
sacrifices to try and get her freedom. However, she chooses to not go with them
because she realizes that she will be so thoroughly in their debt that she will be
forced to marry Abek, which she does not want to do. Gerda and Ilse are then
transported to a labor camp that specializes in weaving, which they are forced to do
for the German war effort. Gerda regularly receives loving letters from Abek while
in the camp. In August of 1943, the girls are divided into groups and told they will be
leaving the camp and taken to Märzdorf, another labor camp. Luckily, Gerda and Ilse
are in the same group. Märzdorf is almost unbearable for Gerda once she refuses a
supervisor’s advances and is punished by being forced to work both the day and night
shifts. Ilse manages to save her by having them both transferred to a weaving camp
in Landeshut. They discover that there is a men’s camp next door, reputed to be the worst
camp in all of Germany. Gerda is shocked and guilt-ridden when she
hears that Abek has voluntarily transferred there to be closer to her. On May 6, 1944, the girls find out that they are to be transferred again. Ilse
and Gerda continue to mourn the loss of their families but still have hope for their
own survival. The new camp, Grünberg, is brutal, but still not as bad as Märzdorf.
In November, the girls are forced to strip naked and be visually inspected by the SS
(stands for Schutzstaffel, the term for Hitler’s elite group of
soldiers). They hear rumors that they may be sent to provide “amusement” for wounded
German soldiers. Gerda manages to buy enough poison for both herself and Ilse so
that they will be able to avoid this fate. As the war progresses and Germany begins to falter, the situation at the camp
becomes worse and worse. In January 1945, they find out that Germany is being
invaded by the Allies. Girls from other work camps arrive, increasing the camp
population to over 4,000 young women. They are divided into two groups and told they
will be marching to a concentration camp. Gerda says that her group was doomed—only
120 of them survived—but she expresses no regrets about being assigned to this
group. They begin their march, and after only a few days, girls begin to die of
starvation and cold. They march for weeks through bombed-out cities of
Germany and, in March, finally arrive at another camp, Helmbrechts. The next month, however, they are forced to begin marching again, and they
soon cross the Czechoslovakian border. Ilse grows weaker and weaker, and Gerda tries
in vain to protect her. Ilse dies on the march, as do most of the other prisoners.
One night, in a town called Volary, they are locked into a factory building and left
there by the SS with a bomb outside. The bomb does not go off, however, and the Czech people unlock the doors,
announcing that the war is over. The surviving girls are taken to a makeshift
hospital by the Red Cross and American soldiers. One of these American soldiers is
Kurt Klein, who continues to visit Gerda while she is in the hospital. Before he is
forced to go back to America, he asks Gerda to come with him and be his wife. She
says she knows she will never be alone again.