Two migrant workers, George
and Lennie, have been let off a bus miles away from the California
farm where they are due to start work. George is a small, dark man with
“sharp, strong features.” Lennie, his companion, is his opposite,
a giant of a man with a “shapeless” face. Overcome with thirst,
the two stop in a clearing by a pool and decide to camp for the
night. As the two converse, it becomes clear that Lennie has a mild
mental disability, and is deeply devoted to George and dependent
upon him for protection and guidance. George finds that Lennie,
who loves petting soft things but often accidentally kills them,
has been carrying and stroking a dead mouse. George angrily throws it
away, fearing that Lennie might catch a disease from the dead animal.
George complains loudly that his life would be easier without having
to care for Lennie, but the reader senses that their friendship
and devotion is mutual. He and Lennie share a dream of buying their
own piece of land, farming it, and, much to Lennie’s delight, keeping
rabbits. George ends the night by treating Lennie to the story he
often tells him about what life will be like in such an idyllic
place. The next day, the men report to the nearby ranch. George,
fearing how the boss will react to Lennie, insists that he’ll do
all the talking. He lies, explaining that they travel together because
they are cousins and that a horse kicked Lennie in the head when
he was a child. They are hired. They meet Candy, an old “swamper,”
or handyman, with a missing hand and an ancient dog, and Curley,
the boss’s mean-spirited son. Curley is newly married, possessive
of his flirtatious wife, and full of jealous suspicion. Once George
and Lennie are alone in the bunkhouse, Curley’s wife appears and
flirts with them. Lennie thinks she is “purty,” but George, sensing
the trouble that could come from tangling with this woman and her
husband, warns Lennie to stay away from her. Soon, the ranch-hands
return from the fields for lunch, and George and Lennie meet Slim,
the skilled mule driver who wields great authority on the ranch.
Slim comments on the rarity of friendship like that between George
and Lennie. Carlson, another ranch-hand, suggests that since Slim’s
dog has just given birth, they should offer a puppy to Candy and
shoot Candy’s old, good-for-nothing dog. The next day, George confides in Slim that he and Lennie
are not cousins, but have been friends since childhood. He tells
how Lennie has often gotten them into trouble. For instance, they
were forced to flee their last job because Lennie tried to touch
a woman’s dress and was accused of rape. Slim agrees to give Lennie
one of his puppies, and Carlson continues to badger Candy to kill
his old dog. When Slim agrees with Carlson, saying that death would
be a welcome relief to the suffering animal, Candy gives in. Carlson,
before leading the dog outside, promises to do the job painlessly. Slim goes to the barn to do some work, and
Curley, who is maniacally searching for his wife, heads to the barn
to accost Slim. Candy overhears George and Lennie discussing their
plans to buy land, and offers his life’s savings if they will let
him live there too. The three make a pact to let no one else know
of their plan. Slim returns to the bunkhouse, berating Curley for
his suspicions. Curley, searching for an easy target for his anger,
finds Lennie and picks a fight with him. Lennie crushes Curley’s
hand in the altercation. Slim warns Curley that if he tries to get
George and Lennie fired, he will be the laughingstock of the farm. The next night, most of the men go to the local brothel.
Lennie is left with Crooks, the lonely, black stable-hand, and Candy.
Curley’s wife flirts with them, refusing to leave until the other
men come home. She notices the cuts on Lennie’s face and suspects
that he, and not a piece of machinery as Curley claimed, is responsible
for hurting her husband. This thought amuses her. The next day,
Lennie accidentally kills his puppy in the barn. Curley’s wife enters
and consoles him. She admits that life with Curley is a disappointment, and
wishes that she had followed her dream of becoming a movie star.
Lennie tells her that he loves petting soft things, and she offers to
let him feel her hair. When he grabs too tightly, she cries out.
In his attempt to silence her, he accidentally breaks her neck. Lennie flees back to a pool of the Salinas River that
George had designated as a meeting place should either of them get
into trouble. As the men back at the ranch discover what has happened
and gather together a lynch party, George joins Lennie. Much to
Lennie’s surprise, George is not mad at him for doing “a bad thing.” George
begins to tell Lennie the story of the farm they will have together.
As he describes the rabbits that Lennie will tend, the sound of
the approaching lynch party grows louder. George shoots his friend
in the back of the head. When the other men arrive, George lets them believe that
Lennie had the gun, and George wrestled it away from him and shot
him. Only Slim understands what has really happened, that George
has killed his friend out of mercy. Slim consolingly leads him away,
and the other men, completely puzzled, watch them leave.