Addie Bundren, the wife of
Anse Bundren and the matriarch of a poor southern family, is very
ill, and is expected to die soon. Her oldest son, Cash, puts all
of his carpentry skills into preparing her coffin, which he builds right
in front of Addie’s bedroom window. Although Addie’s health is failing
rapidly, two of her other sons, Darl and Jewel, leave town to make
a delivery for the Bundrens’ neighbor, Vernon Tull, whose wife and
two daughters have been tending to Addie. Shortly after Darl and
Jewel leave, Addie dies. The youngest Bundren child, Vardaman, associates
his mother’s death with that of a fish he caught and cleaned earlier
that day. With some help, Cash completes the coffin just before
dawn. Vardaman is troubled by the fact that his mother is nailed
shut inside a box, and while the others sleep, he bores holes in
the lid, two of which go through his mother’s face. Addie and Anse’s
daughter, Dewey Dell, whose recent sexual liaisons with a local
farmhand named Lafe have left her pregnant, is so overwhelmed by
anxiety over her condition that she barely mourns her mother’s death.
A funeral service is held on the following day, where the women
sing songs inside the Bundren house while the men stand outside
on the porch talking to each other. Darl, who narrates much of this first section, returns
with Jewel a few days later, and the presence of buzzards over their
house lets them know their mother is dead. On seeing this sign,
Darl sardonically reassures Jewel, who is widely perceived as ungrateful
and uncaring, that he can be sure his beloved horse is not dead.
Addie has made Anse promise that she will be buried in the town
of Jefferson, and though this request is a far more complicated
proposition than burying her at home, Anse’s sense of obligation,
combined with his desire to buy a set of false teeth, compels him
to fulfill Addie’s dying wish. Cash, who has broken his leg on a
job site, helps the family lift the unbalanced coffin, but it is
Jewel who ends up manhandling it, almost single-handedly, into the
wagon. Jewel refuses, however, to actually come in the wagon, and
follows the rest of the family riding on his horse, which he bought
when he was young by secretly working nights on a neighbor’s land. On the first night of their journey, the Bundrens stay
at the home of a generous local family, who regards the Bundrens’
mission with skepticism. Due to severe flooding, the main bridges
leading over the local river have been flooded or washed away, and
the Bundrens are forced to turn around and attempt a river-crossing
over a makeshift ford. When a stray log upsets the wagon, the coffin
is knocked out, Cash’s broken leg is reinjured, and the team of
mules drowns. Vernon Tull sees the wreck, and helps Jewel rescue
the coffin and the wagon from the river. Together, the family members
and Tull search the riverbed for Cash’s tools. Cora, Tull’s wife, remembers Addie’s unchristian inclination
to respect her son Jewel more than God. Addie herself, speaking
either from her coffin or in a leap back in time to her deathbed,
recalls events from her life: her loveless marriage to Anse; her
affair with the local minister, Whitfield, which led to Jewel’s
conception; and the birth of her various children. Whitfield recalls
traveling to the Bundrens’ house to confess the affair to Anse,
and his eventual decision not to say anything after all. A horse doctor sets Cash’s broken leg, while Cash faints
from the pain without ever complaining. Anse is able to purchase
a new team of mules by mortgaging his farm equipment, using money
that he was saving for his false teeth and money that Cash was saving
for a new gramophone, and trading in Jewel’s horse. The family continues
on its way. In the town of Mottson, residents react with horror to
the stench coming from the Bundren wagon. While the family is in
town, Dewey Dell tries to buy a drug that will abort her unwanted pregnancy,
but the pharmacist refuses to sell it to her, and advises marriage
instead. With cement the family has purchased in town, Darl creates
a makeshift cast for Cash’s broken leg, which fits poorly and only
increases Cash’s pain. The Bundrens then spend the night at a local
farm owned by a man named Gillespie. Darl, who has been skeptical
of their mission for some time, burns down the Gillespie barn with
the intention of incinerating the coffin and Addie’s rotting corpse.
Jewel rescues the animals in the barn, then risks his life to drag
out Addie’s coffin. Darl lies on his mother’s coffin and cries. The next day, the Bundrens arrive in Jefferson and bury
Addie. Rather than face a lawsuit for Darl’s criminal barn burning,
the Bundrens claim that Darl is insane, and give him to a pair of
men who commit him to a Jackson mental institution. Dewey Dell tries again
to buy an abortion drug at the local pharmacy, where a boy working
behind the counter claims to be a doctor and tricks her into exchanging
sexual services for what she soon realizes is not an actual abortion
drug. The following morning, the children are greeted by their father,
who sports a new set of false teeth and, with a mixture of shame
and pride, introduces them to his new bride, a local woman he meets
while borrowing shovels with which to bury Addie.