A Doll’s House opens
on Christmas Eve. Nora Helmer enters her well-furnished living room—the
setting of the entire play—carrying several packages. Torvald Helmer,
Nora’s husband, comes out of his study when he hears her arrive.
He greets her playfully and affectionately, but then chides her
for spending so much money on Christmas gifts. Their conversation
reveals that the Helmers have had to be careful with money for many
years, but that Torvald has recently obtained a new position at
the bank where he works that will afford them a more comfortable
lifestyle. Helene, the maid, announces that the Helmers’ dear friend
Dr. Rank has come to visit. At the same time, another visitor has arrived,
this one unknown. To Nora’s great surprise, Kristine Linde, a former
school friend, comes into the room. The two have not seen each other
for years, but Nora mentions having read that Mrs. Linde’s husband
passed away a few years earlier. Mrs. Linde tells Nora that when
her husband died, she was left with no money and no children. Nora
tells Mrs. Linde about her first year of marriage to Torvald. She
explains that they were very poor and both had to work long hours.
Torvald became sick, she adds, and the couple had to travel to Italy
so that Torvald could recover. Nora inquires further about Mrs. Linde’s life, and Mrs.
Linde explains that for years she had to care for her sick mother
and her two younger brothers. She states that her mother has passed
away, though, and that the brothers are too old to need her. Instead
of feeling relief, Mrs. Linde says she feels empty because she has
no occupation; she hopes that Torvald may be able to help her obtain employment.
Nora promises to speak to Torvald and then reveals a great secret
to Mrs. Linde—without Torvald’s knowledge, Nora illegally borrowed
money for the trip that she and Torvald took to Italy; she told
Torvald that the money had come from her father. For years, Nora
reveals, she has worked and saved in secret, slowly repaying the
debt, and soon it will be fully repaid. Krogstad, a low-level employee at the bank where Torvald works,
arrives and proceeds into Torvald’s study. Nora reacts uneasily
to Krogstad’s presence, and Dr. Rank, coming out of the study, says
Krogstad is “morally sick.” Once he has finished meeting with Krogstad,
Torvald comes into the living room and says that he can probably
hire Mrs. Linde at the bank. Dr. Rank, Torvald, and Mrs. Linde then
depart, leaving Nora by herself. Nora’s children return with their
nanny, Anne-Marie, and Nora plays with them until she notices Krogstad’s
presence in the room. The two converse, and Krogstad is revealed
to be the source of Nora’s secret loan. Krogstad states that Torvald wants to fire him from his
position at the bank and alludes to his own poor reputation. He
asks Nora to use her influence to ensure that his position remains
secure. When she refuses, Krogstad points out that he has in his
possession a contract that contains Nora’s forgery of her father’s
signature. Krogstad blackmails Nora, threatening to reveal her crime
and to bring shame and disgrace on both Nora and her husband if
she does not prevent Torvald from firing him. Krogstad leaves, and
when Torvald returns, Nora tries to convince him not to fire Krogstad,
but Torvald will hear nothing of it. He declares Krogstad an immoral
man and states that he feels physically ill in the presence of such
people. Act Two opens on the following day, Christmas. Alone,
Nora paces her living room, filled with anxiety. Mrs. Linde arrives
and helps sew Nora’s costume for the ball that Nora will be attending
at her neighbors’ home the following evening. Nora tells Mrs. Linde that
Dr. Rank has a mortal illness that he inherited from his father. Nora’s
suspicious behavior leads Mrs. Linde to guess that Dr. Rank is the
source of Nora’s loan. Nora denies Mrs. Linde’s charge but refuses
to reveal the source of her distress. Torvald arrives, and Nora
again begs him to keep Krogstad employed at the bank, but again
Torvald refuses. When Nora presses him, he admits that Krogstad’s
moral behavior isn’t all that bothers him—he dislikes Krogstad’s
overly familiar attitude. Torvald and Nora argue until Torvald sends
the maid to deliver Krogstad’s letter of dismissal. Torvald leaves. Dr. Rank arrives and tells Nora that
he knows he is close to death. She attempts to cheer him up and
begins to flirt with him. She seems to be preparing to ask him to
intervene on her behalf in her struggle with Torvald. Suddenly,
Dr. Rank reveals to Nora that he is in love with her. In light of
this revelation, Nora refuses to ask Dr. Rank for anything. Once Dr. Rank leaves, Krogstad arrives and demands an
explanation for his dismissal. He wants respectability and has changed the
terms of the blackmail: he now insists to Nora that not only that he
be rehired at the bank but that he be rehired in a higher position. He
then puts a letter detailing Nora’s debt and forgery in the -Helmers’
letterbox. In a panic, Nora tells Mrs. Linde everything, and Mrs.
Linde instructs Nora to delay Torvald from opening the letter as
long as possible while she goes to speak with Krogstad. In order
to distract Torvald from the letterbox, Nora begins to practice the
tarantella she will perform at that evening’s costume party. In her
agitated emotional state, she dances wildly and violently, displeasing
Torvald. Nora manages to make Torvald promise not to open his mail
until after she performs at the party. Mrs. Linde soon returns and
says that she has left Krogstad a note but that he will be gone
until the following evening. The next night, as the costume party takes place upstairs, Krogstad
meets Mrs. Linde in the Helmers’ living room. Their conversation
reveals that the two had once deeply in love, but Mrs. Linde left
Krogstad for a wealthier man who would enable her to support her
family. She tells Krogstad that now that she is free of her own
familial obligations and wishes to be with Krogstad and care for
his children. Krogstad is overjoyed and says he will demand his letter
back before Torvald can read it and learn Nora’s secret. Mrs. Linde,
however, insists he leave the letter, because she believes both Torvald
and Nora will be better off once the truth has been revealed. Soon after Krogstad’s departure, Nora and Torvald enter,
back from the costume ball. After saying goodnight to Mrs. Linde,
Torvald tells Nora how desirable she looked as she danced. Dr. Rank, who
was also at the party and has come to say goodnight, promptly interrupts
Torvald’s advances on Nora. After Dr. Rank leaves, Torvald finds
in his letterbox two of Dr. Rank’s visiting cards, each with a black
cross above the name. Nora knows Dr. Rank’s cards constitute his
announcement that he will soon die, and she informs Torvald of this
fact. She then insists that Torvald read Krogstad’s letter. Torvald reads the letter and is outraged. He calls Nora
a hypocrite and a liar and complains that she has ruined his happiness.
He declares that she will not be allowed to raise their children.
Helene then brings in a letter. Torvald opens it and discovers that
Krogstad has returned Nora’s contract (which contains the forged
signature). Overjoyed, Torvald attempts to dismiss his past insults,
but his harsh words have triggered something in Nora. She declares
that despite their eight years of marriage, they do not understand
one another. Torvald, Nora asserts, has treated her like a “doll”
to be played with and admired. She decides to leave Torvald, declaring that
she must “make sense of [her]self and everything around her.” She
walks out, slamming the door behind her.