Two tribunes, Flavius and Murellus, find
scores of Roman citizens wandering the streets, neglecting their work
in order to watch Julius Caesar’s triumphal parade: Caesar has defeated
the sons of the deceased Roman general Pompey, his archrival, in battle. The tribunes
scold the citizens for abandoning their duties and remove decorations
from Caesar’s statues. Caesar enters with his entourage, including
the military and political figures Brutus, Cassius, and Antony.
A Soothsayer calls out to Caesar to “beware the Ides of March,”
but Caesar ignores him and proceeds with his victory celebration
(I.ii.19, I.ii.25). Cassius and Brutus, both longtime intimates of Caesar
and each other, converse. Cassius tells Brutus that he has seemed
distant lately; Brutus replies that he has been at war with himself.
Cassius states that he wishes Brutus could see himself as others
see him, for then Brutus would realize how honored and respected
he is. Brutus says that he fears that the people want Caesar to
become king, which would overturn the republic. Cassius concurs
that Caesar is treated like a god though he is merely a man, no
better than Brutus or Cassius. Cassius recalls incidents of Caesar’s
physical weakness and marvels that this fallible man has become
so powerful. He blames his and Brutus’s lack of will for allowing
Caesar’s rise to power: surely the rise of such a man cannot be
the work of fate. Brutus considers Cassius’s words as Caesar returns.
Upon seeing Cassius, Caesar tells Antony that he deeply distrusts
Cassius. Caesar departs, and another politician, Casca, tells Brutus
and Cassius that, during the celebration, Antony offered the crown
to Caesar three times and the people cheered, but Caesar refused
it each time. He reports that Caesar then fell to the ground and
had some kind of seizure before the crowd; his demonstration of
weakness, however, did not alter the plebeians’ devotion to him.
Brutus goes home to consider Cassius’s words regarding Caesar’s
poor qualifications to rule, while Cassius hatches a plot to draw
Brutus into a conspiracy against Caesar. That night, Rome is plagued with violent weather and a
variety of bad omens and portents. Brutus finds letters in his house
apparently written by Roman citizens worried that Caesar has become too
powerful. The letters have in fact been forged and planted by Cassius,
who knows that if Brutus believes it is the people’s will, he will
support a plot to remove Caesar from power. A committed supporter
of the republic, Brutus fears the possibility of a dictator-led empire,
worrying that the populace would lose its voice. Cassius arrives
at Brutus’s home with his conspirators, and Brutus, who has already
been won over by the letters, takes control of the meeting. The
men agree to lure Caesar from his house and kill him. Cassius wants
to kill Antony too, for Antony will surely try to hinder their plans,
but Brutus disagrees, believing that too many deaths will render
their plot too bloody and dishonor them. Having agreed to spare
Antony, the conspirators depart. Portia, Brutus’s wife, observes
that Brutus appears preoccupied. She pleads with him to confide
in her, but he rebuffs her. Caesar prepares to go to the Senate. His wife, Calpurnia,
begs him not to go, describing recent nightmares she has had in
which a statue of Caesar streamed with blood and smiling men bathed
their hands in the blood. Caesar refuses to yield to fear and insists
on going about his daily business. Finally, Calpurnia convinces
him to stay home—if not out of caution, then as a favor to her.
But Decius, one of the conspirators, then arrives and convinces
Caesar that Calpurnia has misinterpreted her dreams and the recent
omens. Caesar departs for the Senate in the company of the conspirators. As Caesar proceeds through the streets toward the Senate,
the Soothsayer again tries but fails to get his attention. The citizen Artemidorus
hands him a letter warning him about the conspirators, but Caesar
refuses to read it, saying that his closest personal concerns are
his last priority. At the Senate, the conspirators speak to Caesar,
bowing at his feet and encircling him. One by one, they stab him
to death. When Caesar sees his dear friend Brutus among his murderers,
he gives up his struggle and dies. The murderers bathe their hands and swords in Caesar’s
blood, thus bringing Calpurnia’s premonition to fruition. Antony,
having been led away on a false pretext, returns and pledges allegiance
to Brutus but weeps over Caesar’s body. He shakes hands with the
conspirators, thus marking them all as guilty while appearing to
make a gesture of conciliation. When Antony asks why they killed
Caesar, Brutus replies that he will explain their purpose in a funeral
oration. Antony asks to be allowed to speak over the body as well;
Brutus grants his permission, though Cassius remains suspicious
of Antony. The conspirators depart, and Antony, alone now, swears
that Caesar’s death shall be avenged. Brutus and Cassius go to the Forum to speak to the public.
Cassius exits to address another part of the crowd. Brutus declares
to the masses that though he loved Caesar, he loves Rome more, and Caesar’s
ambition posed a danger to Roman liberty. The speech placates the
crowd. Antony appears with Caesar’s body, and Brutus departs after
turning the pulpit over to Antony. Repeatedly referring to Brutus
as “an honorable man,” Antony’s speech becomes increasingly sarcastic;
questioning the claims that Brutus made in his speech that Caesar
acted only out of ambition, Antony points out that Caesar brought
much wealth and glory to Rome, and three times turned down offers
of the crown. Antony then produces Caesar’s will but announces that
he will not read it for it would upset the people inordinately.
The crowd nevertheless begs him to read the will, so he descends
from the pulpit to stand next to Caesar’s body. He describes Caesar’s
horrible death and shows Caesar’s wounded body to the crowd. He
then reads Caesar’s will, which bequeaths a sum of money to every
citizen and orders that his private gardens be made public. The
crowd becomes enraged that this generous man lies dead; calling
Brutus and Cassius traitors, the masses set off to drive them from
the city. Meanwhile, Caesar’s adopted son and appointed successor, Octavius,
arrives in Rome and forms a three-person coalition with Antony and
Lepidus. They prepare to fight Cassius and Brutus, who have been
driven into exile and are raising armies outside the city. At the
conspirators’ camp, Brutus and Cassius have a heated argument regarding
matters of money and honor, but they ultimately reconcile. Brutus
reveals that he is sick with grief, for in his absence Portia has
killed herself. The two continue to prepare for battle with Antony
and Octavius. That night, the Ghost of Caesar appears to Brutus,
announcing that Brutus will meet him again on the battlefield. Octavius and Antony march their army toward Brutus
and Cassius. Antony tells Octavius where to attack, but Octavius
says that he will make his own orders; he is already asserting his
authority as the heir of Caesar and the next ruler of Rome. The
opposing generals meet on the battlefield and exchange insults before
beginning combat. Cassius witnesses his own men fleeing and hears that Brutus’s men
are not performing effectively. Cassius sends one of his men, Pindarus,
to see how matters are progressing. From afar, Pindarus sees one
of their leaders, Cassius’s best friend, Titinius, being surrounded
by cheering troops and concludes that he has been captured. Cassius
despairs and orders Pindarus to kill him with his own sword. He
dies proclaiming that Caesar is avenged. Titinius himself then arrives—the
men encircling him were actually his comrades, cheering a victory
he had earned. Titinius sees Cassius’s corpse and, mourning the
death of his friend, kills himself. Brutus learns of the deaths of Cassius and Titinius with
a heavy heart, and prepares to take on the Romans again. When his
army loses, doom appears imminent. Brutus asks one of his men to
hold his sword while he impales himself on it. Finally, Caesar can
rest satisfied, he says as he dies. Octavius and Antony arrive.
Antony speaks over Brutus’s body, calling him the noblest Roman
of all. While the other conspirators acted out of envy and ambition,
he observes, Brutus genuinely believed that he acted for the benefit
of Rome. Octavius orders that Brutus be buried in the most honorable
way. The men then depart to celebrate their victory.