Meursault, the narrator, is
a young man living in Algiers. After receiving a telegram informing him
of his mother’s death, he takes a bus to Marengo, where his mother
had been living in an old persons’ home. He sleeps for almost the
entire trip. When he arrives, he speaks to the director of the home.
The director allows Meursault to see his mother, but Meursault finds that
her body has already been sealed in the coffin. He declines the caretaker’s
offer to open the coffin. That night, Meursault keeps vigil over his mother’s body.
Much to his displeasure, the talkative caretaker stays with him
the whole time. Meursault smokes a cigarette, drinks coffee, and
dozes off. The next morning, before the funeral, he meets with the
director again. The director informs him that Thomas Perez, an old
man who had grown very close to Meursault’s mother, will be attending the
funeral service. The funeral procession heads for the small local village,
but Perez has difficulty keeping up and eventually faints from the
heat. Meursault reports that he remembers little of the funeral.
That night, he happily arrives back in Algiers. The next day, Meursault goes to the public beach for
a swim. There, he runs into Marie Cardona, his former co-worker.
The two make a date to see a comedy at the movie theater that evening.
After the movie they spend the night together. When Meursault wakes
up, Marie is gone. He stays in bed until noon and then sits on his
balcony until evening, watching the people pass on the street. The following day, Monday, Meursault returns to work.
He has lunch with his friend Emmanuel and then works all afternoon. While
walking upstairs to his apartment that night, Meursault runs into
Salamano, an old man who lives in his building and owns a mangy
dog. Meursault also runs into his neighbor, Raymond Sintes, who
is widely rumored to be a pimp. Raymond invites Meursault over for
dinner. Over the meal, Raymond recounts how he beat up his mistress
after he discovered that she had been cheating on him. As a result,
he got into a fight with her brother. Raymond now wants to torment
his mistress even more, but he needs Meursault to write a letter
to lure his mistress back to him. Meursault agrees and writes the
letter that night. The following Saturday, Marie visits Meursault at his
apartment. She asks Meursault if he loves her, and he replies that
“it didn’t mean anything,” but probably not. The two then hear shouting
coming from Raymond’s apartment. They go out into the hall and watch
as a policeman arrives. The policeman slaps Raymond and says that
he will be summoned to the police station for beating up his mistress. Later,
Raymond asks Meursault to testify on his behalf, and Meursault agrees.
That night, Raymond runs into Salamano, who laments that his dog
has run away. Marie asks Meursault if he wants to marry her. He replies
indifferently but says that they can get married if she wants to,
so they become engaged. The following Sunday, Meursault, Marie,
and Raymond go to a beach house owned by Masson, one of Raymond’s friends.
They swim happily in the ocean and then have lunch. That afternoon,
Masson, Raymond, and Meursault run into two Arabs on the beach,
one of whom is the brother of Raymond’s mistress. A fight breaks
out and Raymond is stabbed. After tending to his wounds, Raymond
returns to the beach with Meursault. They find the Arabs at a spring.
Raymond considers shooting them with his gun, but Meursault talks
him out of it and takes the gun away. Later, however, Meursault
returns to the spring to cool off, and, for no apparent reason,
he shoots Raymond’s mistress’s brother. Meursault is arrested and thrown into jail. His lawyer
seems disgusted at Meursault’s lack of remorse over his crime, and,
in particular, at Meursault’s lack of grief at his mother’s funeral.
Later, Meursault meets with the examining magistrate, who cannot
understand Meursault’s actions. The magistrate brandishes a crucifix
and demands that Meursault put his faith in God. Meursault refuses, insisting
that he does not believe in God. The magistrate cannot accept Meursault’s
lack of belief, and eventually dubs him “Monsieur Antichrist.” One day, Marie visits Meursault in prison. She forces
herself to smile during the visit, and she expresses hope that Meursault
will be acquitted and that they will get married. As he awaits his
trial, Meursault slowly adapts to prison life. His isolation from
nature, women, and cigarettes torments him at first, but he eventually adjusts
to living without them, and soon does not even notice their absence.
He manages to keep his mind occupied, and he sleeps for most of
each day. Meursault is taken to the courthouse early on the morning
of his trial. Spectators and members of the press fill the courtroom.
The subject of the trial quickly shifts away from the murder to
a general discussion of Meursault’s character, and of his reaction
to his mother’s death in particular. The director and several other
people who attended the vigil and the funeral are called to testify,
and they all attest to Meursault’s lack of grief or tears. Marie
reluctantly testifies that the day after his mother’s funeral she
and Meursault went on a date and saw a comedic movie. During his
summation the following day, the prosecutor calls Meursault a monster
and says that his lack of moral feeling threatens all of society.
Meursault is found guilty and is sentenced to death by beheading. Meursault returns to prison to await his execution. He
struggles to come to terms with his situation, and he has trouble
accepting the certainty and inevitability of his fate. He imagines
escaping and he dreams of filing a successful legal appeal. One
day, the chaplain comes to visit against Meursault’s wishes. He
urges Meursault to renounce his atheism and turn to God, but Meursault
refuses. Like the magistrate, the chaplain cannot believe that Meursault
does not long for faith and the afterlife. Meursault suddenly becomes enraged,
grabs the chaplain, and begins shouting at him. He declares that
he is correct in believing in a meaningless, purely physical world.
For the first time, Meursault truly embraces the idea that human
existence holds no greater meaning. He abandons all hope for the
future and accepts the “gentle indifference of the world.” This
acceptance makes Meursault feel happy.