Bigger Thomas, a poor,
uneducated, twenty-year-old black man in 1930s
Chicago, wakes up one morning in his family’s cramped apartment
on the South Side of the city. He sees a huge rat scamper across
the room, which he corners and kills with a skillet. Having grown
up under the climate of harsh racial prejudice in 1930s
America, Bigger is burdened with a powerful conviction that he has
no control over his life and that he cannot aspire to anything other
than menial, low-wage labor. His mother pesters him to take a job
with a rich white man named Mr. Dalton, but Bigger instead chooses
to meet up with his friends to plan the robbery of a white man’s
store. Anger, fear, and frustration define Bigger’s daily existence,
as he is forced to hide behind a façade of toughness or risk succumbing
to despair. While Bigger and his gang have robbed many black-owned businesses,
they have never attempted to rob a white man. Bigger sees
whites not as individuals, but as a natural, oppressive force—a great
looming “whiteness” pressing down upon him. Bigger’s fear of confronting
this force overwhelms him, but rather than admit his fear, he violently
attacks a member of his gang to sabotage the robbery. Left with
no other options, Bigger takes a job as a chauffeur for the Daltons. Coincidentally, Mr. Dalton is also Bigger’s landlord,
as he owns a controlling share of the company that manages the apartment
building where Bigger’s family lives. Mr. Dalton and other wealthy
real estate barons are effectively robbing the poor, black tenants
on Chicago’s South Side—they refuse to allow blacks to rent apartments
in predominantly white neighborhoods, thus leading to overpopulation
and artificially high rents in the predominantly black South Side.
Mr. Dalton sees himself as a benevolent philanthropist, however,
as he donates money to black schools and offers jobs to “poor, timid
black boys” like Bigger. However, Mr. Dalton practices this token
philanthropy mainly to alleviate his guilty conscience for exploiting
poor blacks. Mary, Mr. Dalton’s daughter, frightens and angers Bigger
by ignoring the social taboos that govern the relations between
white women and black men. On his first day of work, Bigger drives
Mary to meet her communist boyfriend, Jan. Eager to prove their
progressive ideals and racial tolerance, Mary and Jan force Bigger
to take them to a restaurant in the South Side. Despite Bigger’s
embarrassment, they order drinks, and as the evening passes, all
three of them get drunk. Bigger then drives around the city while
Mary and Jan make out in the back seat. Afterward, Mary is too drunk
to make it to her bedroom on her own, so Bigger helps her up the
stairs. Drunk and aroused by his unprecedented proximity to a young
white woman, Bigger begins to kiss Mary. Just as Bigger places Mary on her bed, Mary’s blind mother,
Mrs. Dalton, enters the bedroom. Though Mrs. Dalton cannot see him, her
ghostlike presence terrifies him. Bigger worries that Mary, in her drunken
condition, will reveal his presence. He covers her face with a pillow
and accidentally smothers her to death. Unaware that Mary has been
killed, Mrs. Dalton prays over her daughter and returns to bed.
Bigger tries to conceal his crime by burning Mary’s body in the Daltons’
furnace. He decides to try to use the Daltons’ prejudice against
communists to frame Jan for Mary’s disappearance. Bigger believes
that the Daltons will assume Jan is dangerous and that he may have
kidnapped their daughter for political purposes. Additionally, Bigger
takes advantage of the Daltons’ racial prejudices to avoid suspicion,
continuing to play the role of a timid, ignorant black servant who
would be unable to commit such an act. Mary’s murder gives Bigger a sense of power and identity
he has never known. Bigger’s girlfriend, Bessie, makes an offhand
comment that inspires him to try to collect ransom money from the
Daltons. They know only that Mary has vanished, not that she is
dead. Bigger writes a ransom letter, playing upon the Daltons’ hatred
of communists by signing his name “Red.” He then bullies Bessie
to take part in the ransom scheme. However, Mary’s bones are found in
the furnace, and Bigger flees with Bessie to an empty building. Bigger
rapes Bessie and, frightened that she will give him away, bludgeons
her to death with a brick after she falls asleep. Bigger eludes the massive manhunt for as long as he can,
but he is eventually captured after a dramatic shoot-out. The press
and the public determine his guilt and his punishment before his
trial even begins. The furious populace assumes that he raped Mary
before killing her and burned her body to hide the evidence of the
rape. Moreover, the white authorities and the white mob use Bigger’s crime
as an excuse to terrorize the entire South Side . Jan visits Bigger in jail. He says that he understands
how he terrified, angered, and shamed Bigger through his violation
of the social taboos that govern tense race relations. Jan enlists
his friend, Boris A. Max, to defend Bigger free of charge. Jan and
Max speak with Bigger as a human being, and Bigger begins to see
whites as individuals and himself as their equal. Max tries to save Bigger from the death penalty, arguing
that while his client is responsible for his crime, it is vital
to recognize that he is a product of his environment. Part of the
blame for Bigger’s crimes belongs to the fearful, hopeless existence
that he has experienced in a racist society since birth. Max warns
that there will be more men like Bigger if America does not put
an end to the vicious cycle of hatred and vengeance. Despite Max’s
arguments, Bigger is sentenced to death. Bigger is not a traditional hero by any means. However,
Wright forces us to enter into Bigger’s mind and to understand the
devastating effects of the social conditions in which he was raised.
Bigger was not born a violent criminal. He is a “native son”: a
product of American culture and the violence and racism that suffuse
it.