The novel begins in an alternate world that is similar
to Earth. Lyra Belacqua, a young girl who has been given shelter
by the scholars at Jordan College at Oxford University, and her
“daemon,” Pantalaimon, hide in an off-limits wardrobe in the Headmaster’s
rooms. (In Lyra’s world, daemons are the external forms of people’s
souls.) Lyra and Pantalaimon learn that Lord Asriel, Lyra’s uncle,
is about to be poisoned by the Headmaster for mysterious reasons.
They warn Lord Asriel in time to save his life. Later, they overhear
Lord Asriel telling the scholars at Jordan about a strange substance
he is researching called “Dust.” Lord Asriel is able to convince
the scholars to fund his further explorations of Dust, which require
him to travel to the northernmost reaches of the globe. All of this
greatly excites Lyra’s curiosity about Dust. Later, mysterious kidnappers whom Lyra and her friends
call “Gobblers” take Lyra’s best friend, an Oxford boy named Roger Parslow.
Lyra wants to go look for Roger, but before she can, a woman named
Mrs. Coulter, who appears initially to be some kind of benefactress,
spirits her away to London. Before Lyra leaves Oxford, the Headmaster
gives her a golden compass called an alethiometer, which Lyra does
not know how to use. Arriving in London, Lyra is at first enchanted
by Mrs. Coulter, but Lyra’s rebellious nature, as well as her suspicions
about Mrs. Coulter’s vicious daemon, lead her to flee Mrs. Coulter’s
house. Lyra wants to go north and learn more about Dust. Before
she can, however, she falls in with the Costas, a family that is
part of a clan of people known as Gyptians, who live in boats and
travel on the rivers. The Costas have also lost a boy to the Gobblers. The Costas take Lyra to meet John Faa, the king of the
Gyptians, who is planning an expedition north in search of the Gobblers
and the missing children. From her meeting with John Faa, Lyra learns that
Ma Costa (the mother of the Costa family) looked after her when
she was a baby and that Lord Asriel is her father and Mrs. Coulter
is her mother. Lyra convinces the Gyptians to take her north with
them on their quest to recover the captured children. On the way
there, Lyra learns how to use the alethiometer—a device that allows
her to see into the past, present, and future—with the help of Farder
Coram, a wise old Gyptian man. Their journey north also throws Lyra
into contact with a man named Dr. Lanselius, the representative
of a powerful clan of witches. Lanselius tells Lyra that she has
a great destiny before her. Lanselius also introduces her to Iorek
Byrnison, an armored bear who is the exiled king of his clan. Iorek
agrees to travel with Lyra and the band of Gyptians, who also take
up with Lee Scoresby, a Texan who owns a balloon. They continue
to move north. On their way to Bolvanger, where the Gobblers work, a
menacing clan known as the Tartars attack Lyra and the Gyptians.
The Tartars steal Lyra and bring her to Bolvanger, where the Gobblers keep
the children they have kidnapped. Here, Lyra finds Roger and also
discovers the sinister secret of the Gobblers: they cut daemons and
children apart in a process known as intercision. Furthermore, Lyra
learns that Mrs. Coulter is in charge of the activities at Bolvanger. Lyra leads the children to freedom, but Mrs. Coulter pursues
her. Lee Scoresby rescues Lyra, Roger, and Iorek Byrnison with the
help of Serafina Pekkala, a beautiful witch. They fly away from
Mrs. Coulter and are on their way to rescue Lord Asriel, who is
being held prisoner by the armored bears, when they are attacked
by cliff ghasts. Lyra falls from Lee Scoresby’s balloon and is captured
by the armored bears. She meets Iofur Raknison, who stole Iorek
Byrnison’s throne, and convinces him to fight Iorek by tricking
him into believing that she, Lyra, will become his daemon if he
wins. Iorek goes to the home of the armored bears with Roger and
kills Iofur. Lyra, Roger, and Iorek go to free Lord Asriel. Lord
Asriel tries to sever Roger’s daemon from him in the correct belief
that doing so will release a mass of energy and break through his
world into another. Roger dies, and Lord Asriel creates a bridge
from his world into another. Lyra follows him into the new world. The Subtle Knife begins not in Lyra’s
world, but in our own. Will Parry, a young boy who lives in Oxford
with his sick mother, is being pursued by sinister men who claim
to be with the government. Fearing for her safety, Will takes his
mother to the home of his old piano teacher, Mrs. Cooper. He returns
home but finds that the ominous men have arrived and are looking
for letters exchanged between his parents. Will finds the letters
first and escapes, killing one of the men along the way. As he is
fleeing, Will stumbles into an “anomaly,” a hole in space that leads
him into another world. He finds himself in an abandoned city where
he runs into Lyra, who is also hiding there. Lyra is surprised to
find that Will has no daemon, while Will is surprised to hear her
describe daemons, which he’s never heard of. Meanwhile, Serafina Pekkala, a witch and a friend of Lyra’s,
is looking for her witch clan when she comes across Mrs. Coulter’s boat
is floating in the North Sea. Serafina lands on the boat, makes herself
invisible, and discovers that Mrs. Coulter has captured a witch
and is torturing her in an effort to find out what the witches know
about Lyra. Before the witch can speak, Serafina makes herself visible,
kills the witch, and escapes. She then rejoins her clan, which has
met up with Lee Scoresby. The queen of the witch clan, Ruta Skadi,
is also there. Lee is searching for Stanislaus Grumman, a famous
arctic explorer. Serafina and her clan send out witches to search
for Lyra. Ruta decides to travel with them and then look for Lord
Asriel. Will and Lyra meet a young girl named Angelica and her
brother Paolo, who explain that the city they’re in is named Cittàgazze,
or Ci’gazze. The city is overrun with beings called “specters.”
Children can’t see specters, but adults can. Specters feed on adults’
souls, leaving them in a kind of stupefied trance. Lyra and Will
go through the anomaly to Will’s Oxford. Will is looking for information
about his father, a famed Arctic explorer named John Parry who vanished when
Will was a baby, and Lyra is looking for a physicist who can tell
her more about Dust. Lyra consults the alethiometer, which leads
her to Dr. Mary Malone, a scientist interested in interstellar particles
known as dark matter. Mary and her colleague, Oliver Payne, have
discovered substances they call “Shadows,” which share many characteristics
with the Dust that Lyra is interested in learning more about. Mary
and Oliver have discovered that Shadows are conscious material and
they are trying to open a means of communication between themselves
and the Shadows. Lyra and Will meet up again and go back to Ci’gazze.
Will reads the letters his father sent to his mother and learns
that his father disappeared while looking for an anomaly, a window
between two worlds, very much like the one Will used to get to Ci’gazze. Meanwhile, Lee Scoresby accidentally kills an agent of
the Church, the sinister and very powerful religious organization
that lies at the heart of the books. Serafina, Ruta, and the other
witches fly into the new world that Lord Asriel has linked to (the
world of Ci’gazze). Rebel angels lead Ruta to Lord Asriel and the
fortress he is building in yet another world. Back in Ci’gazze,
Lyra goes to Will’s Oxford without him. She visits Mary and finds
that the police, or people pretending to be police, are there. They
trick her into admitting that she knows Will. A mysterious man named
Lord Charles Latrom helps Lyra escape by letting her into his limousine. He
drives her back to the hole between worlds and steals Lyra’s alethiometer.
Lyra gets Will, and together they go to Latrom’s house. Will figures
out that Latrom is from Lyra’s world because he sees that Latrom
has a daemon. Latrom tells Lyra and Will that he will only give
back the alethiometer if they steal something for him: an immensely
powerful weapon known as the subtle knife. Lyra and Will return to Ci’gazze and go to the Torre degli
Angeli (Tower of the Angels), where the knife-bearer is supposed
to be. There they find that Angelica and Paolo’s other brother,
Tullio, has captured and beaten the knife-bearer, an old man named
Giacomo Paradisi, and is trying to figure out how to use the weapon.
Will and Tullio fight, and though Will loses two fingers in the
battle he emerges victorious and keeps the knife. Tullio, however,
escapes. Giacomo tells Will that the knife is what makes the holes between
the worlds. He teaches Will how to open and close these passageways.
Lyra and Will wait until later that night and return to Will’s Oxford,
where they use the knife to steal the alethiometer back from Latrom.
While they are at his house, Mrs. Coulter arrives, and Lyra remembers
that Sir Charles Latrom is Lord Borealis, a man Mrs. Coulter knows
from her own world. Lyra promises to help Will find his father. Lee Scoresby, meanwhile, has found Stanislaus Grumman,
who tells him that his name is actually John Parry and that he comes
from another world. Parry is now a powerful shaman who has been investigating
Dust. In the course of his studies, Parry has also learned about
the existence of the subtle knife. He is now determined to find
the knife and exhort its bearer to use it for the good of the universe.
Parry does not yet know that Will is in possession of the knife
and he enlists Scoresby’s help to scour existence in search of the
knife’s bearer. Back in Ci’gazze, a mob of angry children, led by Tullio’s
sister Angelica, attack Lyra and Will. Serafina and her band of
witches rescue them. Back in Will’s Oxford, Mary Malone has begun
to communicate with the Shadows and has learned from them that she
has to go to Ci’gazze in order to help Lyra and Will. Meanwhile,
Ruta Skadi rejoins Serafina’s clan and tells the witches about Lord
Asriel’s fortress. She explains that Lord Asriel is planning to
wage war on God. She leaves again, and Serafina’s band continues
north. Lee Scoresby and John Parry, traveling in Lee’s balloon,
enter into the world of Ci’gazze. Soldiers sent by the Church pursue
them. Lee crashes the balloon and John uses his powers to make three
of the four Church zeppelins that are pursuing them crash. The fourth lands,
and Lee dies in the fight to hold off the soldiers while Parry runs
ahead to meet the knife bearer. Lyra, Will, and the witches, led by
the alethiometer, continue rushing north. Elsewhere, Mrs. Coulter catches a witch named Lena Feldt.
Lena admits that the witches believe that Lyra is going to be a
new Eve and that she will cause another fall from grace. That same
night, Will wakes up and leaves the camp he has established with
Lyra to go for a walk. He meets John Parry on a lonely mountaintop
and the two simultaneously realize their relationship to one another:
Parry is Will’s father. Parry tells Will that the subtle knife,
the most powerful weapon in the world, can destroy God and that
Will must seek out Lord Asriel in order to set up an ultimate confrontation
between good and evil. Suddenly, Juta Kamainen—a witch whose love
Parry once rejected—appears and kills Will’s father and then herself.
Devastated, Will heads back to the camp. As he arrives, he discovers
that awaiting him are two angels. The witches are gone and the only
sign of Lyra is her alethiometer lying in the dust. The book opens deep in a cave in the Himalayas, where
Mrs. Coulter is holding Lyra captive, feeding her some sort of poison
that keeps her asleep. Lyra dreams of speaking to Roger in the world
of the dead. She promises she’ll come for him. A little girl named
Ama brings food to Mrs. Coulter and tries to find a way to wake
up Lyra. In the meantime, the angels Balthamos and Baruch are trying
to bring Will to Lord Asriel so that Will can use the knife to kill
God (known as “the Authority”). Will refuses and says his first
task is to rescue Lyra. Metatron, the strongest of all Church angels,
attacks Baruch and Balthamos. Will rescues them and brings them
into another world. Balthamos goes with him and Baruch goes to Lord Asriel
in order to tell him of Will’s decision. Serafina Pekkala meets with
Iorek Byrnison and tells him that Lee Scoresby is dead. Iorek goes
to find the body of his friend in the world of Ci’gazze before returning
to his own world to lead the armored bears south to the Himalayas.
Baruch is attacked on his way to Lord Asriel’s fortress and dies
as he is telling Lord Asriel that Will has the subtle knife and Mrs.
Coulter is holding Lyra captive. While Lord Asriel and his allies plan to rescue Lyra from
Mrs. Coulter, the Church plans its own mission. Having learned from
its own alethiometer reader that Lyra is going to be a new Eve,
Church leaders plan to kill her. They send a priest named Father
Gomez out to look for Mary Malone, who they believe will lead them
to Lyra and Will. They also send out a force to attack the cave
in which Mrs. Coulter is keeping Lyra. Mary, in the meantime, is
making her way through the world of Ci’gazze. She enters a hole
into another universe where she meets the mulefa, conscious beings
that travel on wheels. They take her in and teach her their language. Will is traveling in Lyra’s world with Balthamos, who
pretends to be his daemon. Will and Balthamos come across the armored
bears, and Will convinces Iorek Byrnison to bring him south and
help him rescue Lyra. As Will and Iorek travel South, two of Lord
Asriel’s spies travel toward Lyra’s cave with the Church’s fighting
force. These spies are Chevalier Tialys and Lady Salmakia, two very
small people who ride dragonflies and who are known as Gallivespians. When he finally arrives in the Himalayas, Will meets Ama,
who helps him save Lyra. At night, they enter the cave by using
the knife to cut through to another world. Mrs. Coulter catches
them and makes Will break the knife. Chevalier Tialys stings her
and paralyses her. Just then, Lord Asriel’s forces and the Church’s
forces converge above them and begin to fight. Ama and Will wake
Lyra and bring her to safety. Chevalier Tialys and Lady Salmakia
come with them and the group finds Iorek, who has been fighting.
Iorek is able to mend Will’s knife, and Will and Lyra decide to
go to the world of the dead and rescue all the souls trapped there.
To enter the world of the dead, Will and Lyra must leave their daemons
behind. This is the first time Will has realized that he has a daemon.
They enter the world of the dead and lead all the ghosts to freedom. Mrs. Coulter has been captured by Lord Asriel’s ally,
King Ogunwe, who brings her to Lord Asriel’s fortress. Mrs. Coulter steals
a ship and flies to the Consistorial Court, a branch of the Church,
where she discovers a plot to build a bomb that will kill Lyra.
She tries to stop them with the help of the leader of the Gallivespian
spies, Lord Roke. Mary, in the world of the mulefa, makes a mirror
for herself that enables her to see Dust. In the world of the dead,
the bomb explodes but does not kill Lyra. Instead, it creates a great
abyss. Will uses the subtle knife to cut a hole through which the
dead can escape. Will’s father’s ghost tells him that Will and Lyra’s
daemons are hiding in Lord Asriel’s world. Will and Lyra go to Lord Asriel’s world, where the forces
of Metatron are attacking Asriel’s fortress. Lyra and Will rescue
God from a group of cliff ghasts, but God dies, drifting away into
the atmosphere. Chevalier Tialys and Lady Salmakia die in battle.
Lyra and Will find their daemons and escape into the world of the
mulefa. Mrs. Coulter lures Metatron to the abyss that was opened
by the bomb. She and Lord Asriel drag him into the abyss to die.
The mulefa find Lyra and Will, whose daemons have run away again, and
bring them to Mary, who tells them what it’s like to fall in love, and
how holy it can seem. Mary has discovered that Dust is leaving the
world, and she is worried. While they are looking for their daemons,
Will and Lyra realize that they are in love. Just before they kiss,
Father Gomez tries to kill Lyra, but Balthamos appears and kills
Father Gomez. When Lyra and Will realize they are in love, the Dust
stops escaping so quickly. Lyra and Will find their daemons, but
Serafina and an angel named Xaphania say that Will and Lyra must
be separated. Dust is escaping through the holes made by the subtle
knife, and they have to close the holes and return to their own
worlds. Lyra tries to consult the alethiometer but has lost the
ability to read it. Will and Lyra agree to be separated, but they
pick a spot that exists in both their worlds, where they can sit
and think of each other. Will and Mary return to their world, and
Lyra and Pantalaimon return to Jordan College. There they meet a
female scholar who offers to teach Lyra how to read the alethiometer.
Lyra and Pantalaimon agree that they have to cherish the lives they
have and work to build the Republic of Heaven.