Eight people, all strangers to
each other, are invited to Indian Island, off the English
coast. Vera Claythorne, a former governess, thinks she has been
hired as a secretary; Philip Lombard, an adventurer, and William Blore,
an ex-detective, think they have been hired to look out for trouble
over the weekend; Dr. Armstrong thinks he has been hired to look
after the wife of the island’s owner. Emily Brent, General Macarthur,
Tony Marston, and Judge Wargrave think they are going to visit old
friends. When they arrive on the island, the guests are greeted
by Mr. and Mrs. Rogers, the butler and housekeeper, who report that
the host, someone they call Mr. Owen, will not arrive until the
next day. That evening, as all the guests gather in the drawing
room after an excellent dinner, they hear a recorded voice accusing
each of them of a specific murder committed in the past and never
uncovered. They compare notes and realize that none of them, including
the servants, knows “Mr. Owen,” which suggests that they were brought
here according to someone’s strange plan. As they discuss what to do, Tony Marston chokes on poisoned whiskey
and dies. Frightened, the party retreats to bed, where almost everyone
is plagued by guilt and memories of their crimes. Vera Claythorne
notices the similarity between the death of Marston and the first
verse of a nursery rhyme, “Ten Little Indians,” that hangs in each
bedroom. The next morning the guests find that Mrs. Rogers apparently died
in her sleep. The guests hope to leave that morning, but the boat that
regularly delivers supplies to the island does not show up. Blore,
Lombard, and Armstrong decide that the deaths must have been murders
and determine to scour the island in search of the mysterious Mr.
Owen. They find no one, however. Meanwhile, the oldest guest, General
Macarthur, feels sure he is going to die and goes to look out at
the ocean. Before lunch, Dr. Armstrong finds the general dead of
a blow to the head. The remaining guests meet to discuss their situation.
They decide that one of them must be the killer. Many make vague
accusations, but Judge Wargrave reminds them that the existing evidence
suggests any of them could be the killer. Afternoon and dinner pass
restlessly, and everyone goes to bed, locking his or her door before doing
so. The next morning, they find that Rogers has been killed while
chopping wood in preparation for breakfast. At this point, the guests
feel sure the murders are being carried out according to the dictates
of the nursery rhyme. Also, they realize that the dining-room table
initially featured ten Indian figures, but with each death one of
the figures disappears. After breakfast, Emily Brent feels slightly giddy, and
she remains alone at the table for a while. She is soon found dead,
her neck having been injected with poison. At this point, Wargrave
initiates an organized search of everyone’s belongings, and anything
that could be used as a weapon is locked away. The remaining guests
sit together, passing time and casting suspicious looks at each
other. Finally, Vera goes to take a bath, but she is startled by
a piece of seaweed hanging from her ceiling and cries out. Blore,
Lombard, and Armstrong run to help her, only to return downstairs
to find Wargrave draped in a curtain that resembles courtroom robes
and bearing a red mark on his forehead. Armstrong examines the body
and reports that Wargrave has been shot in the head. That night, Blore hears footsteps in the hall; upon checking,
he finds that Armstrong is not in his room. Blore and Lombard search for
Armstrong, but they cannot find him anywhere in the house or on
the island. When they return from searching, they discover another
Indian figure missing from the table. Vera, Lombard, and Blore go outside, resolving to stay
in the safety of the open land. Blore decides to go back into the
house to get food. The other two hear a crash, and they find someone
has pushed a statue out of a second-story window, killing Blore
as he approached the house. Vera and Lombard retreat to the shore, where
they find Armstrong’s drowned body on the beach. Convinced that
Lombard is the killer, Vera steals Lombard’s gun and shoots him.
She returns to her bedroom to rest, happy to have survived. But
upon finding a noose waiting for her in her room, she feels a strange
compulsion to enact the last line of the nursery rhyme, and hangs
herself. The mystery baffles the police until a manuscript in
a bottle is found. The late Judge Wargrave wrote the manuscript
explaining that he planned the murders because he wanted to punish
those whose crimes are not punishable under law. Wargrave frankly admits
to his own lust for blood and pleasure in seeing the guilty punished.
When a doctor told Wargrave he was dying, he decided to die in a
blaze, instead of letting his life trickle away. He discusses how
he chose his victims and how he did away with Marston, Mr. and Mrs.
Rogers, Macarthur, and Emily Brent. Wargrave then describes how
he tricked Dr. Armstrong into helping him fake his own death, promising
to meet the doctor by the cliffs to discuss a plan. When Armstrong
arrived, Wargrave pushed him over the edge into the sea, then returned
to the house and pretended to be dead. His ruse enabled
him to dispose of the rest of the guests without drawing their suspicion.
Once Vera hanged herself on a noose that he prepared for her, Wargrave
planned to shoot himself in such a way that his body would fall
onto the bed as if it had been laid there. Thus, he hoped, the police
would find ten dead bodies on an empty island.