Why do men behave justly? Is
it because they fear societal punishment? Are they trembling before notions
of divine retribution? Do the stronger elements of society scare
the weak into submission in the name of law? Or do men behave justly
because it is good for them to do so? Is justice, regardless of
its rewards and punishments, a good thing in and of itself? How
do we define justice? Plato sets out to answer these questions
in The Republic. He wants to define justice, and to
define it in such a way as to show that justice is worthwhile in
and of itself. He meets these two challenges with a single solution:
a definition of justice that appeals to human psychology, rather
than to perceived behavior. Plato’s strategy in The Republic is
to first explicate the primary notion of societal, or political,
justice, and then to derive an analogous concept of individual justice.
In Books II, III, and IV, Plato identifies political justice as
harmony in a structured political body. An ideal society consists
of three main classes of people—producers (craftsmen, farmers, artisans,
etc.), auxiliaries (warriors), and guardians (rulers); a society
is just when relations between these three classes are right. Each
group must perform its appropriate function, and only that function,
and each must be in the right position of power in relation to the
others. Rulers must rule, auxiliaries must uphold rulers’ convictions,
and producers must limit themselves to exercising whatever skills
nature granted them (farming, blacksmithing, painting, etc.) Justice
is a principle of specialization: a principle that requires that
each person fulfill the societal role to which nature fitted him
and not interfere in any other business. At the end of Book IV, Plato tries to show that individual
justice mirrors political justice. He claims that the soul of every
individual has a three part structure analagous to the three classes
of a society. There is a rational part of the soul, which seeks
after truth and is responsible for our philosophical inclinations;
a spirited part of the soul, which desires honor and is responsible
for our feelings of anger and indignation; and an appetitive part
of the soul, which lusts after all sorts of things, but money most
of all (since money must be used to fulfill any other base desire).
The just individual can be defined in analogy with the just society;
the three parts of his soul achieve the requisite relationships
of power and influence in regard to one another. In a just individual,
the rational part of the soul rules, the spirited part of the soul
supports this rule, and the appetitive part of the soul submits
and follows wherever reason leads. Put more plainly: in a just individual,
the entire soul aims at fulfilling the desires of the rational part,
much as in the just society the entire community aims at fulfilling
whatever the rulers will. The parallels between the just society and the just individual
run deep. Each of the three classes of society, in fact, is dominated
by one of the three parts of the soul. Producers are dominated by
their appetites—their urges for money, luxury, and pleasure. Warriors
are dominated by their spirits, which make them courageous. Rulers
are dominated by their rational faculties and strive for wisdom.
Books V through VII focus on the rulers as the philosopher kings. In a series of three analogies—the allegories of the
sun, the line, and the cave—Plato explains who these individuals
are while hammering out his theory of the Forms. Plato explains
that the world is divided into two realms, the visible (which we
grasp with our senses) and the intelligible (which we only grasp
with our mind). The visible world is the universe we see around
us. The intelligible world is comprised of the Forms—abstract, changeless
absolutes such as Goodness, Beauty, Redness, and Sweetness that
exist in permanent relation to the visible realm and make it possible.
(An apple is red and sweet, the theory goes, because it participates
in the Forms of Redness and Sweetness.) Only the Forms are objects
of knowledge, because only they possess the eternal unchanging truth
that the mind—not the senses—must apprehend. Only those whose minds are trained to grasp the Forms—the
philosophers—can know anything at all. In particular, what the philosophers
must know in order to become able rulers is the Form of the Good—the
source of all other Forms, and of knowledge, truth, and beauty.
Plato cannot describe this Form directly, but he claims that it is
to the intelligible realm what the sun is to the visible realm.
Using the allegory of the cave, Plato paints an evocative portrait
of the philosopher’s soul moving through various stages of cognition
(represented by the line) through the visible realm into
the intelligible, and finally grasping the Form of the Good. The
aim of education is not to put knowledge into the soul, but to put
the right desires into the soul—to fill the soul with a lust for
truth, so that it desires to move past the visible world, into the
intelligible, ultimately to the Form of the Good. Philosophers form the only class of men to possess knowledge and
are also the most just men. Their souls, more than others, aim to fulfil
the desires of the rational part. After comparing the philosopher
king to the most unjust type of man—represented by the tyrant, who
is ruled entirely by his non-rational appetites—Plato claims that
justice is worthwhile for its own sake. In Book IX he presents three
arguments for the conclusion that it is desirable to be just. By
sketching a psychological portrait of the tyrant, he attempts to
prove that injustice tortures a man’s psyche, whereas a just soul
is a healthy, happy one, untroubled and calm. Next he argues that, though
each of the three main character types—money-loving, honor-loving,
and truth-loving—have their own conceptions of pleasure and of the
corresponding good life—each choosing his own life as the most pleasant—only
the philosopher can judge because only he has experienced all three
types of pleasure. The others should accept the philosopher’s judgement
and conclude that the pleasures associated with the philosophical
are most pleasant and thus that the just life is also most pleasant.
He tries to demonstrate that only philosophical pleasure is really
pleasure at all; all other pleasure is nothing more than cessation
of pain. One might notice that none of these arguments actually
prove that justice is desirable apart from its consequences—instead,
they establish that justice is always accompanied by true pleasure.
In all probability, none of these is actually supposed to serve
as the main reason why justice is desirable. Instead, the desirability
of justice is likely connected to the intimate relationship between
the just life and the Forms. The just life is good in and of itself
because it involves grasping these ultimate goods, and imitating
their order and harmony, thus incorporating them into one’s own
life. Justice is good, in other words, because it is connected to
the greatest good, the Form of the Good. Plato ends The Republic on a surprising
note. Having defined justice and established it as the greatest
good, he banishes poets from his city. Poets, he claims, appeal
to the basest part of the soul by imitating unjust inclinations.
By encouraging us to indulge ignoble emotions in sympathy with the
characters we hear about, poetry encourages us to indulge these
emotions in life. Poetry, in sum, makes us unjust. In closing, Plato
relates the myth of Er, which describes the trajectory of a soul
after death. Just souls are rewarded for one thousand years,
while unjust ones are punished for the same amount of time. Each
soul then must choose its next life.