Lear, the aging king of Britain, decides
to step down from the throne and divide his kingdom evenly among
his three daughters. First, however, he puts his daughters through
a test, asking each to tell him how much she loves him. Goneril
and Regan, Lear’s older daughters, give their father flattering
answers. But Cordelia, Lear’s youngest and favorite daughter, remains
silent, saying that she has no words to describe how much she loves
her father. Lear flies into a rage and disowns Cordelia. The king
of France, who has courted Cordelia, says that he still wants to
marry her even without her land, and she accompanies him to France
without her father’s blessing. Lear quickly learns that he made a bad decision. Goneril
and Regan swiftly begin to undermine the little authority that Lear
still holds. Unable to believe that his beloved daughters are betraying him,
Lear slowly goes insane. He flees his daughters’ houses to wander
on a heath during a great thunderstorm, accompanied by his Fool
and by Kent, a loyal nobleman in disguise. Meanwhile, an elderly nobleman named Gloucester also experiences
family problems. His illegitimate son, Edmund, tricks him into believing
that his legitimate son, Edgar, is trying to kill him. Fleeing the
manhunt that his father has set for him, Edgar disguises himself
as a crazy beggar and calls himself “Poor Tom.” Like Lear, he heads
out onto the heath. When the loyal Gloucester realizes that Lear’s daughters
have turned against their father, he decides to help Lear in spite
of the danger. Regan and her husband, Cornwall, discover him helping Lear,
accuse him of treason, blind him, and turn him out to wander the
countryside. He ends up being led by his disguised son, Edgar, toward
the city of Dover, where Lear has also been brought. In Dover, a French army lands as part of an invasion led
by Cordelia in an effort to save her father. Edmund apparently becomes romantically
entangled with both Regan and Goneril, whose husband, Albany, is
increasingly sympathetic to Lear’s cause. Goneril and Edmund conspire
to kill Albany. The despairing Gloucester tries to commit suicide, but
Edgar saves him by pulling the strange trick of leading him off
an imaginary cliff. Meanwhile, the English troops reach Dover, and
the English, led by Edmund, defeat the Cordelia-led French. Lear
and Cordelia are captured. In the climactic scene, Edgar duels with
and kills Edmund; we learn of the death of Gloucester; Goneril poisons Regan
out of jealousy over Edmund and then kills herself when her treachery
is revealed to Albany; Edmund’s betrayal of Cordelia leads to her
needless execution in prison; and Lear finally dies out of grief
at Cordelia’s passing. Albany, Edgar, and the elderly Kent are left
to take care of the country under a cloud of sorrow and regret.