The novel’s opening chapters establish the Civil War setting, delve into the
sociopolitical debates surrounding the war, and illustrate the lives of slaves,
particularly Uncle Daniel, Aunt Linda, Robert Johnson, and Tom Anderson. In the
North Carolina marketplace, Tom and Robert meet to secretly discuss the Union army’s
progress against the South. Soon after, the slaves desert their owners and join the
Union army. Uncle Daniel leads a clandestine prayer meeting in the woods, the only
safe location for slaves to congregate and worship. Iola Leroy, a slave with a white complexion and blue eyes, is held captive by
the abusive Master Tom. Tom Anderson arranges for the Union army to rescue Iola.
Exiled from family and home, Iola becomes a nurse in the army. Tom is wounded in a
skirmish with Confederate forces, and Iola’s attempts to restore his health are in
vain. Dr. Gresham, a white Union hospital physician, develops affection for Iola but
is disturbed by her tender care of Tom, a black man. Dr. Gresham despises
miscegenation, or racial mixing, and checks his feelings for Iola when he learns
that she is a mulatta, a woman who is both black and white. Nevertheless, Dr.
Gresham cannot suppress his feelings and proposes to Iola. To explain Iola’s condition as a slave, the novel flashes back to her parents’
courtship and marriage. The time sequence is out of order to develop conflict and
suspense. Iola’s father, Eugene Leroy, is a wealthy southern slave owner. When he
becomes ill, Leroy’s friends abandon him. A compassionate slave, Marie, who is
one-quarter black, tends to Leroy. Grateful for Marie’s care, the love-struck Leroy
sends Marie to a northern school, frees her from slavery, and, despite protests from
his cousin Alfred Lorraine, proposes to her. The couple marry, and Marie bears three
children who are one-eighth black, but they decide to raise Harry, Iola, and Gracie
as white. To protect them from prejudice and slavery, the Leroys lead a solitary
life and later send their children to northern schools. Marie predicts that
Lorraine, who shuns her and her children because they are mulatto, will sell them
into slavery upon Leroy’s death. The novel skips ahead several years to Iola’s childhood in a northern school.
Ironically, Iola professes a pro-slavery stance. In a letter to her parents, she
details a controversial incident at school—a black girl’s enrollment. The novel’s
nonlinear structure creates irony and foreshadows conflict, for the reader already
knows that Iola is an enslaved mulatta. Upon Leroy’s death from yellow fever,
Lorraine orchestrates the family’s demise, finagling legal loopholes to overtake
Leroy’s property, to void Leroy and Marie’s marriage, and to nullify Marie’s
freedom. Then, he nefariously sells Marie and her children as slaves. Marie
discloses Iola’s true identity as a mulatta. Marie and Gracie also catch yellow
fever, and Gracie dies. The plot shifts back to the present. Iola rebuffs Dr. Gresham’s proposal
because she refuses to marry a man whose race has oppressed her family and the black
community via slavery. Iola begins to accept her identity as black, and she resolves
to locate her mother before committing to any marriage. Meanwhile, Harry remains at
school in Maine, unaware of his family’s tragedy until he receives a letter from
Iola. When he learns of his real identity and his family’s separation, he becomes
ill. Later, Harry joins the Union army’s black regime. While he hesitates to
associate himself with a race ostracized as lower class and inferior, Harry chooses
to pass as black. Iola later nurses Robert, hurt in battle. She sings to soothe him,
and he recognizes the song as his mother’s. Coincidentally, the two discover that
they are relatives. Robert is Marie’s sister and Iola’s uncle. As the Civil War
ends, the Union hospital closes. Iola briefly teaches at a school for freed slaves.
Robert revisits the Johnson plantation, where he was enslaved, and discovers a
thriving settlement of freed blacks, including Uncle Daniel and Aunt Linda. Harry
awakens from a war injury with his mother unexplainably at his bedside. Within the
context of religious events, the slaves’ families reunite. At a prayer meeting,
Robert reclaims his long-lost mother, Harriet. Harry and Iola reconnect at a
Methodist Conference. While Marie and her children move to Georgia and relish their time together,
Harriet and Robert travel to the North. Eventually, Iola and Marie reunite with
Harriet. Robert and Iola confront discrimination in the northern housing market, and
as a black woman, Iola struggles to find employment. The Leroy family associates
with progressive northern thinkers, including Dr. Latimer, Dr. Gresham, and Miss
Delany, who gather at a conversazione to discuss the post-war
sociopolitical conditions facing the black race. The group aims to sway public
opinion about blacks’ achievements, and the astute Dr. Latimer, a mulatto, proves
his scholarly ability before Dr. Latrobe, a white southerner skeptical of blacks’
intellectual equality. Lorraine becomes a Confederate soldier and dies in the war. The convoluted plot revolves around and questions the social implications of
miscegenation. Iola rejects Dr. Gresham’s second proposal as she now fully perceives
herself as a black woman who intends to marry a black man. Dr. Latimer decides to
pass as black, sacrificing family fortune and the upward mobility granted to whites.
Both fervent proponents for blacks’ rights, Dr. Latimer and Iola fall in love and
marry. Harry is engaged to Miss Delany, a college-educated black woman and teacher.
The plight of slave owner and slave has reversed. The slave owners have
deteriorated. Master Gundover, Aunt Katie’s slave owner, died, and Mrs. Johnson,
now poor, depends on Robert’s financial support. However, the former
slaves prosper and return to North Carolina to elevate the black community. Dr.
Latimer and Iola succeed in their respective careers as physician and teacher. Harry
and Miss Delany operate a school. Robert purchases land, which he resells to the
needy. While Uncle Daniel and Harriet retire, Marie volunteers in the community. The
reunited Leroy family toils as advocates for racial empowerment and civil
rights.