Howard Roark, a brilliant young
architect, is expelled from his architecture school
for refusing to follow the school’s outdated traditions. He goes
to New York to work for Henry Cameron, a disgraced architect whom
Roark admires. Roark’s schoolmate, Peter Keating, moves to New York
and goes to work for the prestigious architectural firm Francon
& Heyer, run by the famous Guy Francon. Roark and Cameron create
beautiful work, but their projects rarely receive recognition,
whereas Keating’s ability to flatter and please brings him almost
instant success. In just a few years, he becomes a partner at the
firm after he causes Francon’s previous partner to have a stroke.
Henry Cameron retires, financially ruined, and Roark opens his own
small office. His unwillingness to compromise his designs in order
to satisfy clients eventually forces him to close down the office
and take a job at a granite quarry in Connecticut. In Connecticut, Roark feels an immediate, passionate
attraction to Dominique Francon, Guy Francon’s temperamental and
beautiful daughter. Society disgusts Dominique, and she has retreated
to her family’s estate to escape the mediocre architecture she sees
all around her. One night, Roark enters the house and rapes her.
Dominique discovers that this is what she had needed, but when she
looks for Roark, he has left the quarry to design a building for
a prominent New York businessman. Dominique returns to New York
and discovers Roark’s identity. She realizes that he designed a
building she admires. Dominique and Roark begin to meet in secret,
but in public she tries to sabotage his career and destroy him.
Ellsworth Toohey, an architectural critic and socialist, slowly
prepares to rise to power. He seeks to prevent men from excelling
by teaching that talent and ability are of no great consequence,
and that the greatest virtue is humility. Toohey sees Roark as a
great threat and tries to destroy him. Toohey convinces a weak-minded
businessman named Hopton Stoddard to hire Roark as the designer
for a temple dedicated to the human spirit, then persuades the businessman
to sue Roark once the building is completed. At Roark’s trial, every
prominent architect in New York testifies that Roark’s style is
unorthodox and illegitimate, but Dominique declares that the world
does not deserve the gift Roark has given it. Stoddard wins the
case and Roark loses his business again. To punish herself for desiring
Roark, Dominique marries Peter Keating. Enter Gail Wynand, a brilliant publisher, who has lost
his early idealism and made his fortune by printing newspapers that
say exactly what the public wants to hear. Wynand meets Dominique and
falls in love with her, so he buys her from Keating by offering him
money and a prestigious contract in exchange for his wife. Dominique
agrees to marry Wynand because she thinks he is an even worse person
than Keating, but to her surprise, Wynand is a man of principle.
Wynand and Roark meet and become fast friends, but Wynand does not
know the truth about Roark’s relationship with Dominique. Meanwhile
Keating, who has fallen from grace, asks Roark for help with the
Cortlandt Homes, a public housing project. The idea of economical
housing intrigues Roark. He agrees to design the project and let
Keating take the credit on the condition that no one makes a single
alteration to his plan. When Roark returns from a summer-long yacht trip with Wynand,
he finds that, despite the agreement, the Cortlandt Homes project
has been changed. Roark asks Dominique to distract the night watchman
one night and then dynamites the building. When the police arrive,
he submits without resistance. The entire country condemns Roark,
but Wynand finally finds the courage to follow his convictions and
orders his newspapers to defend him. The Banner’s circulation
drops and the workers go on strike, but Wynand keeps printing with
Dominique’s help. Eventually, Wynand gives in and denounces Roark.
At the trial, Roark seems doomed, but he rouses the courtroom with
a statement about the value of selfishness and the need to remain
true to oneself. Roark describes the triumphant role of creators
and the price they pay at the hands of corrupt societies. The jury
finds him not guilty. Roark marries Dominique. Wynand asks Roark
to design one last building, a skyscraper that will testify to the
supremacy of man.