The narrator begins telling
his story with the claim that he is an “invisible man.” His invisibility,
he says, is not a physical condition—he is not literally invisible—but
is rather the result of the refusal of others to see him. He says
that because of his invisibility, he has been hiding from the world,
living underground and stealing electricity from the Monopolated
Light & Power Company. He burns 1,369 light bulbs
simultaneously and listens to Louis Armstrong’s “(What Did I Do
to Be So) Black and Blue” on a phonograph. He says that he has gone
underground in order to write the story of his life and invisibility. As a young man, in the late 1920s
or early 1930s, the narrator lived
in the South. Because he is a gifted public speaker, he is invited
to give a speech to a group of important white men in his town.
The men reward him with a briefcase containing a scholarship to
a prestigious black college, but only after humiliating him by forcing
him to fight in a “battle royal” in which he is pitted against other
young black men, all blindfolded, in a boxing ring. After the battle
royal, the white men force the youths to scramble over an electrified
rug in order to snatch at fake gold coins. The narrator has a dream
that night in which he imagines that his scholarship is actually
a piece of paper reading “To Whom It May Concern . . . Keep This
Nigger-Boy Running.” Three years later, the narrator is a student at the college.
He is asked to drive a wealthy white trustee of the college, Mr.
Norton, around the campus. Norton talks incessantly about his daughter, then
shows an undue interest in the narrative of Jim Trueblood, a poor,
uneducated black man who impregnated his own daughter. After hearing
this story, Norton needs a drink, and the narrator takes him to
the Golden Day, a saloon and brothel that normally serves black
men. A fight breaks out among a group of mentally imbalanced black
veterans at the bar, and Norton passes out during the chaos. He
is tended by one of the veterans, who claims to be a doctor and
who taunts both Norton and the narrator for their blindness regarding
race relations. Back at the college, the narrator listens to a long, impassioned sermon
by the Reverend Homer A. Barbee on the subject of the college’s
Founder, whom the blind Barbee glorifies with poetic language. After
the sermon, the narrator is chastised by the college president, Dr.
Bledsoe, who has learned of the narrator’s misadventures with Norton
at the old slave quarters and the Golden Day. Bledsoe rebukes the
narrator, saying that he should have shown the white man an idealized
version of black life. He expels the narrator, giving him seven
letters of recommendation addressed to the college’s white trustees
in New York City, and sends him there in search of a job. The narrator travels to the bright lights and bustle of 1930s
Harlem, where he looks unsuccessfully for work. The letters of recommendation
are of no help. At last, the narrator goes to the office of one
of his letters’ addressees, a trustee named Mr. Emerson. There he
meets Emerson’s son, who opens the letter and tells the narrator that
he has been betrayed: the letters from Bledsoe actually portray the
narrator as dishonorable and unreliable. The young Emerson helps
the narrator to get a low-paying job at the Liberty Paints plant, whose
trademark color is “Optic White.” The narrator briefly serves as
an assistant to Lucius Brockway, the black man who makes this white
paint, but Brockway suspects him of joining in union activities
and turns on him. The two men fight, neglecting the paint-making;
consequently, one of the unattended tanks explodes, and the narrator
is knocked unconscious. The narrator wakes in the paint factory’s hospital, having
temporarily lost his memory and ability to speak. The white doctors
seize the arrival of their unidentified black patient as an
opportunity to conduct electric shock experiments. After the narrator
recovers his memory and leaves the hospital, he collapses on the
street. Some black community members take him to the home of Mary,
a kind woman who lets him live with her for free in Harlem and nurtures
his sense of black heritage. One day, the narrator witnesses the eviction
of an elderly black couple from their Harlem apartment. Standing
before the crowd of people gathered before the apartment, he gives
an impassioned speech against the eviction. Brother Jack overhears
his speech and offers him a position as a spokesman for the Brotherhood,
a political organization that allegedly works to help the socially
oppressed. After initially rejecting the offer, the narrator takes
the job in order to pay Mary back for her hospitality. But the Brotherhood
demands that the narrator take a new name, break with his past,
and move to a new apartment. The narrator is inducted into the Brotherhood
at a party at the Chthonian Hotel and is placed in charge of advancing
the group’s goals in Harlem. After being trained in rhetoric by a white member of the
group named Brother Hambro, the narrator goes to his assigned branch
in Harlem, where he meets the handsome, intelligent black youth leader
Tod Clifton. He also becomes familiar with the black nationalist
leader Ras the Exhorter, who opposes the interracial Brotherhood
and believes that black Americans should fight for their rights over
and against all whites. The narrator delivers speeches and becomes
a high-profile figure in the Brotherhood, and he enjoys his work.
One day, however, he receives an anonymous note warning him to remember
his place as a black man in the Brotherhood. Not long after, the
black Brotherhood member Brother Wrestrum accuses the narrator of
trying to use the Brotherhood to advance a selfish desire for personal
distinction. While a committee of the Brotherhood investigates the
charges, the organization moves the narrator to another post, as
an advocate of women’s rights. After giving a speech one evening,
he is seduced by one of the white women at the gathering, who attempts
to use him to play out her sexual fantasies about black men. After a short time, the Brotherhood sends the narrator
back to Harlem, where he discovers that Clifton has disappeared.
Many other black members have left the group, as much of the Harlem community
feels that the Brotherhood has betrayed their interests. The narrator
finds Clifton on the street selling dancing “Sambo” dolls—dolls
that invoke the stereotype of the lazy and obsequious slave. Clifton
apparently does not have a permit to sell his wares on the street.
White policemen accost him and, after a scuffle, shoot him dead
as the narrator and others look on. On his own initiative, the narrator
holds a funeral for Clifton and gives a speech in which he portrays
his dead friend as a hero, galvanizing public sentiment in Clifton’s
favor. The Brotherhood is furious with him for staging the funeral
without permission, and Jack harshly castigates him. As Jack rants
about the Brotherhood’s ideological stance, a glass eye falls from
one of his eye sockets. The Brotherhood sends the narrator back
to Brother Hambro to learn about the organization’s new strategies
in Harlem. The narrator leaves feeling furious and anxious to gain
revenge on Jack and the Brotherhood. He arrives in Harlem to find
the neighborhood in ever-increased agitation over race relations.
Ras confronts him, deploring the Brotherhood’s failure to draw on
the momentum generated by Clifton’s funeral. Ras sends his men to beat
up the narrator, and the narrator is forced to disguise himself
in dark glasses and a hat. In his dark glasses, many people on the streets
mistake him for someone named Rinehart, who seems to be a pimp,
bookie, lover, and reverend all at once. At last, the narrator goes
to Brother Hambro’s apartment, where Hambro tells him that the Brotherhood
has chosen not to emphasize Harlem and the black movement. He cynically
declares that people are merely tools and that the larger interests
of the Brotherhood are more important than any individual. Recalling
advice given to him by his grandfather, the narrator determines
to undermine the Brotherhood by seeming to go along with them completely.
He decides to flatter and seduce a woman close to one of the party
leaders in order to obtain secret information about the group. But the woman he chooses, Sybil, knows nothing about the Brotherhood
and attempts to use the narrator to fulfill her fantasy of being
raped by a black man. While still with Sybil in his apartment, the
narrator receives a call asking him to come to Harlem quickly. The
narrator hears the sound of breaking glass, and the line goes dead.
He arrives in Harlem to find the neighborhood in the midst of a
full-fledged riot, which he learns was incited by Ras. The narrator becomes
involved in setting fire to a tenement building. Running from the
scene of the crime, he encounters Ras, dressed as an African chieftain.
Ras calls for the narrator to be lynched. The narrator flees, only
to encounter two policemen, who suspect that his briefcase contains
loot from the riots. In his attempt to evade them, the narrator
falls down a manhole. The police mock him and draw the cover over
the manhole. The narrator says that he has stayed underground
ever since; the end of his story is also the beginning. He states
that he finally has realized that he must honor his individual complexity
and remain true to his own identity without sacrificing his responsibility
to the community. He says that he finally feels ready to emerge
from underground.