The giver is written
from the point of view of Jonas, an eleven-year-old boy living in
a futuristic society that has eliminated all pain, fear, war, and
hatred. There is no prejudice, since everyone looks and acts basically
the same, and there is very little competition. Everyone is unfailingly
polite. The society has also eliminated choice: at age twelve every
member of the community is assigned a job based on his or her abilities
and interests. Citizens can apply for and be assigned compatible
spouses, and each couple is assigned exactly two children each.
The children are born to Birthmothers, who never see them, and spend
their first year in a Nurturing Center with other babies, or “newchildren,”
born that year. When their children are grown, family units dissolve
and adults live together with Childless Adults until they are too
old to function in the society. Then they spend their last years
being cared for in the House of the Old until they are finally “released”
from the society. In the community, release is death, but it is
never described that way; most people think that after release, flawed
newchildren and joyful elderly people are welcomed into the vast
expanse of Elsewhere that surrounds the communities. Citizens who
break rules or fail to adapt properly to the society’s codes of behavior
are also released, though in their cases it is an occasion of great
shame. Everything is planned and organized so that life is as convenient
and pleasant as possible. Jonas lives with his father, a Nurturer of new children,
his mother, who works at the Department of Justice, and his seven-year-old
sister Lily. At the beginning of the novel, he is apprehensive about
the upcoming Ceremony of Twelve, when he will be given his official
Assignment as a new adult member of the community. He does not have
a distinct career preference, although he enjoys volunteering at
a variety of different jobs. Though he is a well-behaved citizen
and a good student, Jonas is different: he has pale eyes, while most
people in his community have dark eyes, and he has unusual powers
of perception. Sometimes objects “change” when he looks at them.
He does not know it yet, but he alone in his community can perceive
flashes of color; for everyone else, the world is as devoid of color
as it is of pain, hunger, and inconvenience. At the Ceremony of Twelve, Jonas is given the highly honored Assignment
of Receiver of Memory. The Receiver is the sole keeper of the community’s
collective memory. When the community went over to Sameness—its
painless, warless, and mostly emotionless state of tranquility and
harmony—it abandoned all memories of pain, war, and emotion, but
the memories cannot disappear totally. Someone must keep them so
that the community can avoid making the mistakes of the past, even
though no one but the Receiver can bear the pain. Jonas receives
the memories of the past, good and bad, from the current Receiver,
a wise old man who tells Jonas to call him the Giver. The Giver transmits memories by placing his hands on Jonas’s bare
back. The first memory he receives is of an exhilarating sled ride.
As Jonas receives memories from the Giver—memories of pleasure and
pain, of bright colors and extreme cold and warm sun, of excitement
and terror and hunger and love—he realizes how bland and empty life
in his community really is. The memories make Jonas’s life richer
and more meaningful, and he wishes that he could give that richness
and meaning to the people he loves. But in exchange for their peaceful
existence, the people of Jonas’s community have lost the capacity
to love him back or to feel deep passion about anything. Since they
have never experienced real suffering, they also cannot appreciate
the real joy of life, and the life of individual people seems less
precious to them. In addition, no one in Jonas’s community has ever
made a choice of his or her own. Jonas grows more and more frustrated
with the members of his community, and the Giver, who has felt the
same way for many years, encourages him. The two grow very close,
like a grandfather and a grandchild might have in the days before
Sameness, when family members stayed in contact long after their
children were grown. Meanwhile, Jonas is helping his family take care of a
problem newchild, Gabriel, who has trouble sleeping through the
night at the Nurturing Center. Jonas helps the child to sleep by
transmitting soothing memories to him every night, and he begins
to develop a relationship with Gabriel that mirrors the family relationships
he has experienced through the memories. When Gabriel is in danger of
being released, the Giver reveals to Jonas that release is the same as
death. Jonas’s rage and horror at this revelation inspire the Giver to
help Jonas devise a plan to change things in the community forever.
The Giver tells Jonas about the girl who had been designated the
new Receiver ten years before. She had been the Giver’s own daughter,
but the sadness of some of the memories had been too much for her
and she had asked to be released. When she died, all of the memories
she had accumulated were released into the community, and the community
members could not handle the sudden influx of emotion and sensation.
The Giver and Jonas plan for Jonas to escape the community and to
actually enter Elsewhere. Once he has done that, his larger supply
of memories will disperse, and the Giver will help the community
to come to terms with the new feelings and thoughts, changing the
society forever. However, Jonas is forced to leave earlier than planned
when his father tells him that Gabriel will be released the next
day. Desperate to save Gabriel, Jonas steals his father’s bicycle
and a supply of food and sets off for Elsewhere. Gradually, he enters
a landscape full of color, animals, and changing weather, but also
hunger, danger, and exhaustion. Avoiding search planes, Jonas and
Gabriel travel for a long time until heavy snow makes bike travel
impossible. Half-frozen, but comforting Gabriel with memories of
sunshine and friendship, Jonas mounts a high hill. There he finds
a sled—the sled from his first transmitted memory—waiting for him
at the top. Jonas and Gabriel experience a glorious downhill ride
on the sled. Ahead of them, they see—or think they see—the twinkling
lights of a friendly village at Christmas, and they hear music.
Jonas is sure that someone is waiting for them there.