Janie Crawford, an
attractive, confident, middle-aged black woman, returns to Eatonville,
Florida, after a long absence. The black townspeople gossip about
her and -speculate about where she has been and what has happened
to her young husband, Tea Cake. They take her confidence as aloofness,
but Janie’s friend Pheoby Watson sticks up for her. Pheoby visits
her to find out what has happened. Their conversation frames the
story that Janie relates. Janie explains that her grandmother raised her after her
mother ran off. Nanny loves her granddaughter and is dedicated to
her, but her life as a slave and experience with her own daughter,
Janie’s mother, has warped her worldview. Her primary desire is
to marry Janie as soon as possible to a husband who can provide
security and social status for her. She finds a much older farmer
named Logan Killicks and insists that Janie marry him. After moving in with Logan, Janie is miserable. Logan
is pragmatic and unromantic and, in general, treats her like a pack
mule. One day, Joe Starks, a smooth-tongued and ambitious man, ambles down
the road in front of the farm. He and Janie flirt in secret for
a couple weeks before she runs off and marries him. Janie and Jody, as she calls him, travel to all-black
Eatonville, where Jody hopes to have a “big voice.” A consummate
politician, Jody soon succeeds in becoming the mayor, postmaster,
storekeeper, and the biggest landlord in town. But Janie seeks something
more than a man with a big voice. She soon becomes disenchanted
with the monotonous, stifling life that she shares with Jody. She
wishes that she could be a part of the rich social life in town,
but Jody doesn’t allow her to interact with “common” people. Jody
sees Janie as the fitting ornament to his wealth and power, and
he tries to shape her into his vision of what a mayor’s wife should
be. On the surface, Janie silently submits to Jody; inside, however,
she remains passionate and full of dreams. After almost two decades of marriage, Janie finally asserts
herself. When Jody insults her appearance, Janie rips him to shreds
in front of the townspeople, telling them all how ugly and impotent
he is. In retaliation, he savagely beats her. Their marriage breaks
down, and Jody becomes quite ill. After months without interacting,
Janie visits him on his deathbed. Refusing to be silenced,
she once again chastises him for the way that he treated her. As
she berates him, he dies. After Jody’s funeral, Janie feels free for the first time
in years. She rebuffs various suitors who come to court her because
she loves her newfound independence. But when Tea Cake, a man twelve
years her junior, enters her life, Janie immediately senses a spark
of mutual attraction. She begins dating Tea Cake despite critical
gossip within the town. To everyone’s shock, Janie then marries
Tea Cake nine months after Jody’s death, sells Jody’s store, and
leaves town to go with Tea Cake to Jacksonville. During the first week of their marriage, Tea
Cake and Janie encounter difficulties. He steals her money and leaves
her alone one night, making her think that he married her only for
her money. But he returns, explaining that he never meant to leave her
and that his theft occurred in a moment of weakness. Afterward,
they promise to share all their experiences and opinions with each
other. They move to the Everglades, where they work during the harvest
season and socialize during the summer off-season. Tea Cake’s quick
wit and friendliness make their shack the center of entertainment
and social life. A terrible hurricane bursts into the Everglades two years
after Janie and Tea Cake’s marriage. As they desperately flee the
rising waters, a rabid dog bites Tea Cake. At the time, Tea Cake
doesn’t realize the dog’s condition; three weeks later, however,
he falls ill. During a rabies--induced bout of madness, Tea Cake
becomes convinced that Janie is cheating on him. He starts firing
a pistol at her and Janie is forced to kill him to save her life.
She is immediately put on trial for murder, but the all-white, all-male
jury finds her not guilty. She returns to Eatonville where her former
neighbors are ready to spin malicious gossip about her circumstances,
assuming that Tea Cake has left her and taken her money. Janie wraps
up her recounting to Pheoby, who is greatly impressed by Janie’s
experiences. Back in her room that night, Janie feels at one with
Tea Cake and at peace with herself.