When Anne is four years old, she and her mother, Toosweet, her father, Diddly,
and her younger sister, Adline, live in a two-room shack on a plantation. None of
the shacks of the black plantation workers has electricity or indoor plumbing, while
the Carter family’s house has both. At night, when the white family’s house is the
only one lit up, Anne’s mother says the plantation owner is counting money he made
off of them. While Anne’s parents are out working in the fields during the day,
George Lee, Toosweet’s eight-year-old brother, watches Anne and her sister inside.
Resentful of having to babysit, George Lee hits the girls and one day accidentally
sets the wallpaper on fire while trying to scare them with matches. Amid anxieties over money, the fire, and the death of his best friend, Diddly
eventually leaves the family for an affair with Florence, a lighter-skinned black
woman. Toosweet and the children, who now include a son, Junior, eventually move to
at least six different houses over the next six years. Toosweet works as a waitress
at a café for blacks, and then as a maid for white families. Toosweet’s family is
constantly hungry, often eating only bread and beans supplemented by table scraps
from Toosweet’s white employers. Still, Anne does exceptionally well in school. In
the fourth grade, Anne begins working part-time cleaning the houses of white
families. She will continue working until her senior year of high school, spending
most of her after-school hours doing menial jobs in order to put food on the
family’s table. Most of her employers are fairly easy to get along with. The
Claibornes even encourage Anne in her studies and ask her to eat with them at their
table. But Mrs. Burke, a nasty woman and a racist, makes life difficult, especially
when her son Wayne grows close to Anne. Mrs. Burke finally accuses Anne’s brother
Junior of stealing in order to get back at her, relenting only after leaving both
children shaken. Anne quits. Meanwhile, Anne has begun to attract the attention of the boys in her high
school and the men in her community. When she outgrows her school dresses, she wears
jeans, which she cannot afford to replace even when they grow tight. She becomes so
popular with the boys that she is elected homecoming queen. Diddly even provides
Anne with a beautiful gown, making the homecoming parade one of the few joyful
moments of her young life. When Anne is still very young, her mother develops a
romantic relationship with Raymond Davis, with whom she has four more children.
Raymond’s family, especially Miss Pearl, Raymond’s mother, looks down on Toosweet
because she has darker skin than they do. Yet Anne enjoys their new home in
Centreville, and especially Centreville Baptist Church, the upscale church Raymond’s
family attends. When Anne’s mother wants her to attend their old, poorer church,
Anne gets into the first of many serious conflicts with her mother. In the summer of 1955, when Anne hears that Emmett Till, a 14-year-old black
boy visiting from Chicago, has been brutally murdered for allegedly whistling at a
white woman, she becomes acutely conscious of the racial inequality around her. As a
younger child, she struggled to understand the inequity between the races, and she
gains no more understanding of this fact as she grows older. She wonders if there
are any real differences between blacks and whites, save for the fact that the black
women clean the white women’s homes. When Anne first hears about the NAACP (the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People), a forbidden organization in rural Mississippi, she
begins to contemplate how the racial inequalities around her can be overthrown.
Meanwhile, however, her own struggles with her family are more pressing. Toosweet
feels that Anne is starting to look down on her, especially when Anne changes her
name from Essie Mae to Annie Mae because she thinks Essie Mae sounds like a name for
barnyard animals. Anne’s family does not understand Anne’s growing interest in the
civil rights movement; in fact, they are afraid of it. Anne spends her last three
summers of high school in Baton Rouge and New Orleans, doing menial jobs for more
money than she could earn at home. Eventually, Anne can no longer stand the family,
especially Raymond, and she storms out and moves in with her father, Diddly, and his
wife, Emma. Emma and her family are light skinned, but do not hold themselves above
anyone, and Anne grows close to them. Anne accepts a basketball scholarship to Natchez College, a suffocatingly
conservative Baptist college in Mississippi. There, Anne has her first boyfriend.
She eventually transfers to Tougaloo College for her final two years of college. At
Tougaloo, she joins the NAACP, in spite of the strong protests of her mother. The
local sheriff even tells Anne’s mother that Anne must not attend NAACP events or it
will mean trouble for her family. Nonetheless, Anne becomes active in the NAACP and
the civil rights movement, despite her family’s impassioned pleas for her to quit. Anne participates in the famous sit-in at the lunch counter of the Woolworth’s
in Jackson, Mississippi. She later works as a CORE (Coalition for the Organization
of Racial Equality) activist in rural Madison County, Mississippi, where she and the
other activists are the targets of violent threats. After exhaustive work, Anne
concludes that the movement has not improved the lives of people in Mississippi. It
has focused too much on voter registration and even political theater, such as the
Freedom Vote, a mock vote intended to protest disenfranchisement of blacks. Instead,
Anne wants the movement to focus on economic issues, such as helping black farmers
buy their own land. At the end of her memoir, twenty-three-year-old Anne is getting
on a bus to Washington. The bus is filled with volunteers who all seem far more
exuberant and younger than she. As they sing “We Shall Overcome,” Anne wonders if
blacks will ever really overcome racism.