Inferno opens on the
evening of Good Friday in the year 1300. Traveling
through a dark wood, Dante Alighieri has lost his path and now wanders
fearfully through the forest. The sun shines down on a mountain
above him, and he attempts to climb up to it but finds his way blocked
by three beasts—a leopard, a lion, and a she-wolf. Frightened and
helpless, Dante returns to the dark wood. Here he encounters the
ghost of Virgil, the great Roman poet, who has come to guide Dante
back to his path, to the top of the mountain. Virgil says that their
path will take them through Hell and that they will eventually reach
Heaven, where Dante’s beloved Beatrice awaits. He adds that it was
Beatrice, along with two other holy women, who, seeing Dante lost
in the wood, sent Virgil to guide him. Virgil leads Dante through the gates of Hell, marked by
the haunting inscription “abandon all hope, you who enter here”
(III.7). They enter the outlying region of
Hell, the Ante-Inferno, where the souls who in life could not commit
to either good or evil now must run in a futile chase after a blank
banner, day after day, while hornets bite them and worms lap their
blood. Dante witnesses their suffering with repugnance and pity.
The ferryman Charon then takes him and his guide across the river
Acheron, the real border of Hell. The First Circle of Hell, Limbo,
houses pagans, including Virgil and many of the other great writers
and poets of antiquity, who died without knowing of Christ. After
meeting Horace, Ovid, and Lucan, Dante continues into the Second
Circle of Hell, reserved for the sin of Lust. At the border of the
Second Circle, the monster Minos lurks, assigning condemned souls
to their punishments. He curls his tail around himself a certain
number of times, indicating the number of the circle to which the
soul must go. Inside the Second Circle, Dante watches as the souls
of the Lustful swirl about in a terrible storm; Dante meets Francesca,
who tells him the story of her doomed love affair with Paolo da
Rimini, her husband’s brother; the relationship has landed both
in Hell. In the Third Circle of Hell, the Gluttonous must lie in
mud and endure a rain of filth and excrement. In the Fourth Circle,
the Avaricious and the Prodigal are made to charge at one another
with giant boulders. The Fifth Circle of Hell contains the river
Styx, a swampy, fetid cesspool in which the Wrathful spend
eternity struggling with one another; the Sullen lie bound beneath
the Styx’s waters, choking on the mud. Dante glimpses Filippo Argenti,
a former political enemy of his, and watches in delight as other
souls tear the man to pieces. Virgil and Dante next proceed to the walls of the city
of Dis, a city contained within the larger region of Hell. The demons
who guard the gates refuse to open them for Virgil, and an angelic
messenger arrives from Heaven to force the gates open before Dante.
The Sixth Circle of Hell houses the Heretics, and there Dante encounters
a rival political leader named Farinata. A deep valley leads into
the First Ring of the Seventh Circle of Hell, where those who were
violent toward others spend eternity in a river of boiling blood.
Virgil and Dante meet a group of Centaurs, creatures who are half
man, half horse. One of them, Nessus, takes them into the Second
Ring of the Seventh Circle of Hell, where they encounter those who
were violent toward themselves (the Suicides). These souls must
endure eternity in the form of trees. Dante there speaks with Pier
della Vigna. Going deeper into the Seventh Circle of Hell, the travelers find
those who were violent toward God (the Blasphemers); Dante meets
his old patron, Brunetto Latini, walking among the souls of those
who were violent toward Nature (the Sodomites) on a desert of burning
sand. They also encounter the Usurers, those who were violent toward
Art. The monster Geryon transports Virgil and Dante
across a great abyss to the Eighth Circle of Hell, known as Malebolge,
or “evil pockets” (or “pouches”); the term refers to the circle’s
division into various pockets separated by great folds of earth.
In the First Pouch, the Panderers and the Seducers receive lashings
from whips; in the second, the Flatterers must lie in a river of
human feces. The Simoniacs in the Third Pouch hang upside down in
baptismal fonts while their feet burn with fire. In the Fourth Pouch
are the Astrologists or Diviners, forced to walk with their heads
on backward, a sight that moves Dante to great pity. In the Fifth
Pouch, the Barrators (those who accepted bribes) steep in pitch
while demons tear them apart. The Hypocrites in the Sixth Pouch
must forever walk in circles, wearing heavy robes made of lead. Caiphas,
the priest who confirmed Jesus’ death sentence, lies crucified on
the ground; the other sinners tread on him as they walk. In the
horrifying Seventh Pouch, the Thieves sit trapped in a pit of vipers,
becoming vipers themselves when bitten; to regain their form, they
must bite another thief in turn. In the Eighth Pouch of the Eighth Circle of Hell,
Dante speaks to Ulysses, the great hero of Homer’s epics, now doomed
to an eternity among those guilty of Spiritual Theft (the False
Counselors) for his role in executing the ruse of the Trojan Horse.
In the Ninth Pouch, the souls of Sowers of Scandal and Schism walk
in a circle, constantly afflicted by wounds that open and close
repeatedly. In the Tenth Pouch, the Falsifiers suffer from horrible
plagues and diseases. Virgil and Dante proceed to the Ninth Circle of Hell through
the Giants’ Well, which leads to a massive drop to Cocytus, a great
frozen lake. The giant Antaeus picks Virgil and Dante up and sets
them down at the bottom of the well, in the lowest region of Hell.
In Caina, the First Ring of the Ninth Circle of Hell, those who
betrayed their kin stand frozen up to their necks in the lake’s
ice. In Antenora, the Second Ring, those who betrayed their country
and party stand frozen up to their heads; here Dante meets Count
Ugolino, who spends eternity gnawing on the head of the man who
imprisoned him in life. In Ptolomea, the Third Ring, those who betrayed
their guests spend eternity lying on their backs in the frozen lake,
their tears making blocks of ice over their eyes. Dante next follows
Virgil into Judecca, the Fourth Ring of the Ninth Circle of Hell
and the lowest depth. Here, those who betrayed their benefactors
spend eternity in complete icy submersion. A huge, mist-shrouded form lurks ahead, and Dante approaches it.
It is the three-headed giant Lucifer, plunged waist-deep into the ice.
His body pierces the center of the Earth, where he fell when God hurled
him down from Heaven. Each of Lucifer’s mouths chews one of history’s
three greatest sinners: Judas, the betrayer of Christ, and Cassius
and Brutus, the betrayers of Julius Caesar. Virgil leads Dante on
a climb down Lucifer’s massive form, holding on to his frozen tufts
of hair. Eventually, the poets reach the Lethe, the river of forgetfulness,
and travel from there out of Hell and back onto Earth. They emerge
from Hell on Easter morning, just before sunrise.