The Sun Also Rises opens
with the narrator, Jake Barnes, delivering a brief biographical
sketch of his friend, Robert Cohn. Jake is a veteran of World War
I who now works as a journalist in Paris. Cohn is also an American expatriate,
although not a war veteran. He is a rich Jewish writer who lives
in Paris with his forceful and controlling girlfriend, Frances Clyne.
Cohn has become restless of late, and he comes to Jake’s office
one afternoon to try to convince Jake to go with him to South America.
Jake refuses, and he takes pains to get rid of Cohn. That night
at a dance club, Jake runs into Lady Brett Ashley, a divorced socialite
and the love of Jake’s life. Brett is a free-spirited and independent
woman, but she can be very selfish at times. She and Jake met in
England during World War I, when Brett treated Jake for a war wound.
During Jake and Brett’s conversation, it is subtly implied that
Jake’s injury rendered him impotent. Although Brett loves Jake,
she hints that she is unwilling to give up sex, and that for this
reason she will not commit to a relationship with him. The next morning, Jake and Cohn have lunch. Cohn is quite taken
with Brett, and he gets angry when Jake tells him that Brett plans
to marry Mike Campbell, a heavy-drinking Scottish war veteran. That
afternoon, Brett stands Jake up. That night, however, she arrives
unexpectedly at his apartment with Count Mippipopolous, a rich Greek
expatriate. After sending the count out for champagne, Brett tells
Jake that she is leaving for San Sebastian, in Spain, saying it
will be easier on both of them to be apart. Several weeks later, while Brett and Cohn are both traveling
outside of Paris, one of Jake’s friends, a fellow American war veteran named
Bill Gorton, arrives in Paris. Bill and Jake make plans to leave
for Spain to do some fishing and later attend the fiesta at Pamplona.
Jake makes plans to meet Cohn on the way to Pamplona. Jake runs
into Brett, who has returned from San Sebastian; with her is Mike,
her fiancé. They ask if they may join Jake in Spain, and he politely
responds that they may. When Mike leaves for a moment, Brett reveals
to Jake that she and Cohn were in San Sebastian together. Bill and Jake take a train from Paris to Bayonne, in
the south of France, where they meet Cohn. The three men travel
together into Spain, to Pamplona. They plan on meeting Brett and
Mike that night, but the couple does not show up. Bill and Jake
decide to leave for a small town called Burguete to fish, but Cohn
chooses to stay and wait for Brett. Bill and Jake travel to the
Spanish countryside and check into a small, rural inn. They spend
five pleasant days fishing, drinking, and playing cards. Eventually,
Jake receives a letter from Mike. He writes that he and Brett will
be arriving in Pamplona shortly. Jake and Bill leave on a bus that
afternoon to meet the couple. After arriving in Pamplona, Jake and
Bill check into a hotel owned by Montoya, a Spanish bullfighting
expert who likes Jake for his earnest interest in the sport. Jake
and Bill meet up with Brett, Mike, and Cohn, and the whole group
goes to watch the bulls being unloaded in preparation for the bullfights
during the fiesta. Mike mocks Cohn harshly for following Brett around
when he is not wanted. After a few more days of preparation, the fiesta begins.
The city is consumed with dancing, drinking, and general debauchery.
The highlight of the first day is the first bullfight, at which
Pedro Romero, a nineteen-year-old prodigy, distinguishes himself
above all the other bullfighters. Despite its violence, Brett cannot
take her eyes off the bullfight, or Romero. A few days later, Jake
and his friends are at the hotel dining room, and Brett notices
Romero at a nearby table. She persuades Jake to introduce her to
him. Mike again verbally abuses Cohn, and they almost come to blows
before Jake defuses the situation. Later that night, Brett asks
Jake to help her find Romero, with whom she says she has fallen
in love. Jake agrees to help, and Brett and Romero spend the night
together. Jake then meets up with Mike and Bill, who are both extremely drunk.
Cohn soon arrives, demanding to know where Brett is. After an exchange
of insults, Cohn attacks Mike and Jake, knocking them both out.
When Jake returns to the hotel, he finds Cohn lying face down on
his bed and crying. Cohn begs Jake’s forgiveness, and Jake reluctantly
grants it. The next day, Jake learns from Bill and Mike that the
night before Cohn also beat up Romero when he discovered the bullfighter
with Brett; Cohn later begged Romero to shake hands with him, but
Romero refused. At the bullfight that afternoon, Romero fights brilliantly,
dazzling the crowd by killing a bull that had gored a man to death
in the streets. Afterward, he cuts the bull’s ear off and gives
it to Brett. After this final bullfight, Romero and Brett leave
for Madrid together. Cohn has left that morning, so only Bill, Mike,
and Jake remain as the fiesta draws to a close. The next day, the three remaining men rent a car and
drive out of Spain to Bayonne and then go their separate ways. Jake
heads back into Spain to San Sebastian, where he plans to spend
several quiet days relaxing. He receives a telegram from Brett,
however, asking him to come meet her in Madrid. He complies, and
boards an overnight train that same day. Jake finds Brett alone
in a Madrid hotel room. She has broken with Romero, fearing that
she would ruin him and his career. She announces that she now wants
to return to Mike. Jake books tickets for them to leave Madrid.
As they ride in a taxi through the Spanish capital, Brett laments
that she and Jake could have had a wonderful time together. Jake
responds, “Yes, isn’t it pretty to think so?”