King Hrothgar of Denmark,
a descendant of the great king Shield Sheafson, enjoys a prosperous
and successful reign. He builds a great mead-hall, called Heorot,
where his warriors can gather to drink, receive gifts from their lord,
and listen to stories sung by the scops, or bards. But the jubilant
noise from Heorot angers Grendel, a horrible demon who lives in
the swamplands of Hrothgar’s kingdom. Grendel terrorizes the Danes
every night, killing them and defeating their efforts to fight back.
The Danes suffer many years of fear, danger, and death at the hands
of Grendel. Eventually, however, a young Geatish warrior named Beowulf
hears of Hrothgar’s plight. Inspired by the challenge, Beowulf sails
to Denmark with a small company of men, determined to defeat Grendel. Hrothgar, who had once done a great favor for Beowulf’s
father Ecgtheow, accepts Beowulf’s offer to fight Grendel and holds
a feast in the hero’s honor. During the feast, an envious Dane named Unferth
taunts Beowulf and accuses him of being unworthy of his reputation.
Beowulf responds with a boastful description of some of his past
accomplishments. His confidence cheers the Danish warriors, and
the feast lasts merrily into the night. At last, however, Grendel
arrives. Beowulf fights him unarmed, proving himself stronger than
the demon, who is terrified. As Grendel struggles to escape, Beowulf
tears the monster’s arm off. Mortally wounded, Grendel slinks back
into the swamp to die. The severed arm is hung high in the mead-hall
as a trophy of victory. Overjoyed, Hrothgar showers Beowulf with gifts and treasure
at a feast in his honor. Songs are sung in praise of Beowulf, and
the celebration lasts late into the night. But another threat is
approaching. Grendel’s mother, a swamp-hag who lives in a desolate
lake, comes to Heorot seeking revenge for her son’s death. She murders Aeschere,
one of Hrothgar’s most trusted advisers, before slinking away. To
avenge Aeschere’s death, the company travels to the murky swamp,
where Beowulf dives into the water and fights Grendel’s mother in
her underwater lair. He kills her with a sword forged for a giant,
then, finding Grendel’s corpse, decapitates it and brings the head
as a prize to Hrothgar. The Danish countryside is now purged of
its treacherous monsters. The Danes are again overjoyed, and Beowulf’s fame spreads across
the kingdom. Beowulf departs after a sorrowful goodbye to Hrothgar,
who has treated him like a son. He returns to Geatland, where he
and his men are reunited with their king and queen, Hygelac and
Hygd, to whom Beowulf recounts his adventures in Denmark. Beowulf
then hands over most of his treasure to Hygelac, who, in turn, rewards
him. In time, Hygelac is killed in a war against the Shylfings,
and, after Hygelac’s son dies, Beowulf ascends to the throne of
the Geats. He rules wisely for fifty years, bringing prosperity
to Geatland. When Beowulf is an old man, however, a thief disturbs
a barrow, or mound, where a great dragon lies guarding a horde of
treasure. Enraged, the dragon emerges from the barrow and begins
unleashing fiery destruction upon the Geats. Sensing his own death approaching,
Beowulf goes to fight the dragon. With the aid of Wiglaf,
he succeeds in killing the beast, but at a heavy cost. The dragon bites
Beowulf in the neck, and its fiery venom kills him moments after their
encounter. The Geats fear that their enemies will attack them now that
Beowulf is dead. According to Beowulf’s wishes, they burn their departed
king’s body on a huge funeral pyre and then bury him with a massive
treasure in a barrow overlooking the sea.